Episode: 007 Do all training programs maximise hypertrophy eventually?
URL: https://open.spotify.com/episode/6JhODkFaWBm3ytHWd6tOND
Published: 2025-07-06
================================================================================

And welcome back to another episode of Hypertrophy past and present.
Thank you guys for joining us once again today.
We have today we have the first time in our podcast where we've got a second workout from the same
person.
So I'm interested or I'm, I'm excited to share this with you guys so you can actually see how things
have progressed along sort of like experience level when someone goes from beginner to a little bit
more intermediate to be more advanced, how that sort of changed over time.
So I'm not going to get ahead of myself.
I'm going to introduce this in a moment, but before I do, Chris, welcome.
How are you today?
Yeah, I'm doing well.
Thanks, Jake.
Yeah, not too bad at all.
Cutie here, you're you're getting ready for some travelling soon so.
I am, yes, always a little bit stressful, but yeah, I'll get through.
It and I can see suitcases in the background anyway, so this the plan we're talking about today is
another one of Greg Parks.
So obviously Greg, you guys I'm sure are familiar with him.
Missy Universe winner, multi Mr. Universe winner in the 50s, basically all of the 50s, he was
winning Mr. Universe versus first man or first body build at the bench, 500 lbs, So very strong guy
as well, and obviously one of the most recognizable silver airlifters.
Now a few weeks ago, I think 2 weeks ago actually, we did a podcast where we looked at one of his
bulking routines.
Obviously Reggie is well known for this sort of 5 by 5 routine, which isn't sort of a classic 5 by
5.
I could sound a little bit differently, but we talked about that and we looked at what you would
kind of call an abbreviated workout plan.
So it had fewer exercises, had more sets, heavy codes and the exercise variation was relatively
limited.
And that was a fairly common thing for some of these silver lifters to do at certain periods where
they would focus more on, I guess more on compound lifts, more on on weight gaining, more on
strength gaining.
And then they would talk about changing that routine to stuff that was going to develop a little bit
more shape and that would include more isolation exercises.
So today what I wanted to showcase is if your goal is to maximize, if you're, we're not talking
early beginner, we're not talking just trying to get a bit of weight on, we're talking like really
trying to develop the entirety of the body that's going to look very, very differently.
And so the plan I've got today from Greg, this was a fairly advanced plan.
He had a more advanced plan than this, but this was like the, the, I guess he had like a progression
that he wanted people to go through.
And this was like the last stage of that progression was the 4th of that progression.
And then he had more like advanced specialization, stuff like that.
So this is a fairly full on phase and like, I just want to be after and be like, hey, there's a lot
here, OK.
And he suggested people follow just for a short period of time.
Again, this is a finite thing.
You're not going to do this indefinitely.
And then you're going to I think he did suggest like a dealer like a week off when you finish this
before moving on to a new phase.
So again, just reminder, go back, check out our other episode and just see how things actually
change from that sort of earlier beginner weight gaining stage to what he's suggesting here.
So without further ado, today's work out.
So this was what he called his Mr. Universe courses.
So this is published in the early 50s and like I said, this is the last phase of that sort of four
phase kind of training block.
So we start with one of my favorite silver air lifts behind the neck barbell overhead press, a three
sets of eight.
Basically everything here was three sets of eight except for calf phrase, which we'll get to that in
a moment.
So behind the neck, then we moved into standing overhead dumbbell press.
Now he did this in a more sagittal plane.
So the behind the neck, obviously quite a wide frontal plane position.
And there he's gone into satchel plan for dumbbell over.
Then he's gone into squat.
And he in this plan, he recommended a front squat.
He typically would alternate like plans one phase front squat, one phase back squat.
And he did this with heels elevated and he would superset the squat with the bent arm pullover,
which they loved doing the silver area.
They didn't go to failure with the pullover.
They saw it more as a way of expanding the chest.
It wasn't like a yeah, it wasn't a particularly, I guess fatiguing exercise that they just sort of
did it between after the squat.
It was more to kind of get you breathing deeply and heavily.
Then he went into a standing car phrase.
Now with this, and this is the only phase I've seen him do this, but he normally he would do 8 to 10
here.
He did five sets of 30 repetitions.
I mean, Chris, what do you, what do you think when I say that?
So I think really everything that I could say about this car phrase is, is going to be applicable to
the rest of the program because as we're going to see as we get through this, there's a lot of
volume here.
I mean these workouts.
Am I correct in thinking that these workouts are done exactly the same as three times a week?
Yes, yeah.
So, you know, there's a lot here because obviously each exercise is three sets of a moderate load
wraps.
So it's not, you know, I mean, on face value, that would be like perfect, perfectly in line with
everything else that we've seen.
But as you're probably going to point out as we go through these exercises that there's many cases
where a muscle is being trained multiple times.
So you end up with six sets.
And, you know, I think with the with the gastroc here in the standing calf race, I don't think the
gastroc is going to get trained anywhere else because, you know, the Sodius will be the prime and
called plantar flexor in the squat.
So I don't think we're going to see anything else during the gastrop.
So actually, I don't think he's doing more sets here with the calves with the gastrop than he is
with anything else, at least not many things.
The the strangeness is the Rep range.
So, you know, obviously, you know, historically a lot of people have said, you know, are trained
calves with high Rep ranges and simultaneously they've complained that their calves don't grow.
But I think that's probably just what we're seeing here.
Maybe is bit of history about where some of that mythology maybe came from.
You know, maybe as I always say, when we go through these routines together, I always say it could
be fascinating to be still doing this in six months time or a year's time with a totally different
level of knowledge and understanding because we'll have seen so many of these programs and describe
them and analyze them.
Then maybe we'll get to a point where we can say, Oh yes, actually we're starting to see this trend
happening.
Or, you know, maybe you'll have some reading that you've done elsewhere that you can bring light to
some of these these tendencies.
But you know, the moment I don't really have anything insightful to say other than the, yeah, it's
high reps and I wouldn't have expected.
That as you were speaking, one thing you were talking about like the history of it and maybe stuff
will evolve and we'll work out maybe why they're doing some of this stuff.
And one thing that did come to mind here, and you've mentioned this in previous episodes, is
obviously the limitation with equipment.
And this is an example where there was different ways that he did the car phrase in one way was with
a partner literally having someone on your back, right.
And I was actually playing around with different carf exercise yesterday.
And I was doing donkey carf raises.
And one thing that I noticed is I was doing it unloaded.
I didn't have someone on my back.
I had a machine and I was doing it unloaded.
And I, I did it and I was like, Oh, this is actually fairly challenging, just purely with nothing on
me, right.
And then I put on 80 kilos and I was like, Oh, this doesn't feel any different.
And I think I ended up going 100 kilos or whatever.
And it was just by like the, the position I was in the stretch I was in like that was the most
challenging part.
And the load didn't make a a whole heap of difference there.
And I wonder like, and again, like I said, I put in put on 100 kilos or whatever and I was still
doing 12 reps or whatever it was with it.
And if he's literally using someone's body weight for for the resistance here, OK, I can see why
you'd be doing 2530 repetitions, right?
Like maybe it's literally just coming back to the limitation here with load.
So it is a interesting, I guess question upon that.
Anyway, so then we had so standing calf raised and then we did incline dumbbell bench.
And then from the incline dumbbell bench, he went to a flat bench.
Now in this program, he used dumbbells often.
He'd use a wide grip barbell, but he was using dumbbells as well.
So we've got an incline into a flat, then he'd overhead tricep extension into either he gave the
option of dips or what they called the line triceps curl, which was basically skull crushes and he
was using an easy bar here, then a vertical shrug, which they did.
He did with eights.
Again, previously we'd seen him use higher repetitions in the balking phase.
So he's gone back to eights and then an upright row, a barbell curl.
Now this is an odd exercise, seated dumbbell curl.
And what he did is he actually had the dumbbells touching, so they were like held together and he
did a dumbbell curl that way.
I haven't seen, I'm not familiar with seeing any other silver air lifters do that.
Maybe it was done, I'm not sure, but it certainly didn't seem to be a popular exercise, not one that
you're called Rage is doing elsewhere either.
So I don't know if it is just for a little bit of novelty or what, but that's what he suggested
here.
And then he went into hanging leg razors, which we've seen in a couple of our other programs as
well.
So there's a lot there.
What's not there?
There's a couple things that aren't there, that's a good point.
So I'm trying to.
I can't remember what Reg Park's last program was like, but I seem to spend my life on these
podcasts complaining about the lack of good back exercises.
I'm not seeing any back exercises on here apart from the shrug.
I'm not seeing any wide grip pull downs.
I'm not seeing any rows.
There's literally just the pullover, which as you pointed out, probably wasn't a exercise.
That this is really interesting.
This this for me is like extremely strange to see a lack of of pulling exercises in a program like
this.
Yeah, the pullover after I grow, yeah, there's not a lot, is there?
A lot of pressing, but very little pulling.
And as we always, we always say on these analysis, there's no, there's no deadlift variations.
There's very little hamstrings work here.
Well, the interesting thing you may not remember in in the last program we had from him, he did have
both at bent over row and he had the deadlift from blocks.
Yes, yes, it's possible that what we're seeing here is just what he perceived his own weaknesses to
be.
Yeah.
You know, I mean, that's, that's always the interesting aspect of it because on the one hand,
there's a lot of exercise variety.
That makes a lot of sense.
Yeah.
As you pointed out, with the pressing variations, he's moving between frontal and sagittal planes.
We've got different inclines going on, you know, obviously the vertical and the horizontal presses.
There's definitely some interesting stuff here.
He's going between a seated curl, which I'm not sure how that looks, but maybe there's some
differences there with the shoulder angle from the barbell curl.
I don't know.
And the triceps exercises are obviously different because they're using different muscle lengths for
the because of the shoulder angles, at least for the long head.
So you can see that there's definitely some good attempt here to vary exercises in a way that causes
the exact thing that you were setting up this program with, which is that it was intended to provide
better shape, which, you know, really means training muscle fibers that you weren't training
previously.
Yeah.
On the one hand, it's very interesting that we've got this exercise variation that clearly is going
to do a good job.
But on the other hand, it's interesting that we've got these clearly huge gaps which we would regard
as monumentally, you know, kind of deficient in a, in a good training program.
And then of course, the only other thing I would mention is, you know, what's going on with this
volume.
I mean, it's absolutely crazy.
You know, I've got 14 exercises, I've counted while you've been describing it, and that's 14
exercises with three sets per exercise.
That's not going to work for many people, I don't think.
Yeah, it's interesting.
The first point you're making about the excise selection, if you work through most of the upper body
stuff, it seems like he nailed it pretty well.
Like from a shoulder perspective behind the neck frontal plane, that's pretty sweet.
And then going into a sagittal plane overhead.
So we've got good side delt, we've got front delt.
If we look at chest, do a flat bench going into an incline bench, we've got, you know, more sternal,
we've got more clavicular.
He's he's kind of done fairly well at varying the exercises sufficiently to get different regions
from most of the upper body, the triceps he's done it well as well, but then lower body.
I would say that there's probably a bit too much overlap on the two bench press variations unless
they use different grip widths and I can see ways of targeting certain parts of the muscle groups
more efficiently.
But I think I would largely agree with what you're saying that that the majority of what's here is
actually really good.
What becomes strange is the things that are missing.
I'm a little bit unsure about how the upright row fits, you know, because I feel that that's
overlapping with the curl variations that he's got and the and the and the delta exercises that he's
already got.
So really for me, if that upright row was swapped out for a a wide grip pound or even a narrow grip
Rd., I think that would that would be transformational for the program as it's written.
Well, it's odd even the placement of that, because he's placed it vertical.
Shrug.
Right next to the curls because he sees it as a biceps exercise.
Yeah, or or back, but clearly not as delts.
And he did I don't know, you know the way they did the after I grow back then they, they did grow
very high up.
It was kind of like a high pull up to the sort of chin heights.
So, you know it was a little bit different how we do it nowadays, but still.
So exercise selection, a few things missing the mark here, some things he he kind of did pretty
well.
And then volume.
Now, I always find this very interesting when we look at volume, when we look at splitting volume
across different exercises.
And it's interesting to wonder because do we, do we have, would you say we've got good information
on the effect of volume as far as muscle damage if you were to put those six sets in one exercise
compared to those six sets in two different exercises?
No, I wouldn't say that we've got good data about that at all.
So it's possible that the way he's splitting stuff up maybe would have potentially less of impact as
possible than if he put it all in one exercise.
From a physiological point of view, you can start from the ground and work upwards and say what's
happening.
So if you have say for example, you did a squat variation and then you follow it up with a knee
extension, really nice clean example of how we might see something like this happening.
So you do the squat, you're only going to get damage in the single joint quadriceps.
You can't use the rec fan.
You don't add some knee extension sets on the end.
You are going to immediately access fewer motor units in the single joint quadriceps because the
activation is going to move towards the rec fan, which has better leverage, and you're going to use
that preferentially so you're not given that damage is exponentially worse in the highest threshold
motions with the fastest muscle fibers.
Moving from the squat to the knee extension dramatically reduces how much extra damage you're going
to create on the muscle fibers that you've just been damaging in the squat.
So but it creates obviously completely fresh damage in a area that you previously weren't training.
So if I were asked to kind of characterize what I think is going on here physiologically, I would
say you're probably going to see similar total.
This is this is very, very, very difficult to characterize, I think accurately.
But I think you're going to see, I don't think you're going to see a huge increase in damage in the
single joint quadriceps when you add the knee extension on the end is kind of where I'm starting
from.
I don't think you're, you're going to see a huge change because you're not, you've already kind of
gone after the most vulnerable fibers.
Now you're kind of, you know, not going after those anymore.
So your damage isn't going to be as bad on those.
But you are now starting completely fresh on an entirely new muscle.
And obviously they're going to start from the top and work your way downwards.
So in the same way we always say hypertrophy is muscle fiber specific, well, damage here is muscle
fiber specific.
And so those exercises that where those fibers are not actually active, but obviously we're not any
more damage in those fibers.
We've actually got better data on regional damage after exercise than we have on regional
hypertrophy.
So this four or five really nice studies that have actually identified extremely specific locations
of fibre damage inside muscles after various different types of exercise, ranging from aerobic
exercise through to strength training and even strength training.
A different exercises.
And the squat on the knee extension is a perfect example of this one.
We've actually got a study examining exactly this particular problem where people have said, OK,
well, you know, is the damage located in very different areas?
Absolutely is located in extremely different areas as a result of the selection of those exercises,
which is what we'd expect because activation and calcium and accumulation from that activation is
what drives damage.
So if you activate a fiber as much or at all, you can't create damage in that fire.
So I think what we would expect is that if you were to say, OK, let's try and characterize what's
going on.
I think the addition of the knee extension after the squat wouldn't cause more damage in the same
areas that the squat has caused damage.
And I think it would be relatively limited in those areas.
It would be some, but it you're not going after the highest social motions in those areas to the
same degree, but it would create completely new damage in a totally separate location.
So if you would say, well, OK, let's just try and say, well, how many damaged fibers have we got?
And you know, are they more damaged or less damaged?
Well, I would say you've definitely got more damaged fibers as a result of doing that extra
exercise.
So you've, you've kind of started using a different exercise.
You've trained some new fibers from the top down.
You know, you're going to create damage from the top down.
So you're going to get more total fibers damaged.
And probably as a result, overall, you're going to get some more damage on a, on a total whole body
level.
So then you would expect to have a bit more CNS fatigue as a result of that inflammation from those
damaged fibers getting into the bloodstream.
And this is really where I think people are starting to think.
So very brief interlude.
So one of the things that I actually enjoy seeing, and people probably think I get frustrated about
this, but I don't.
One of the things I enjoy seeing is when people take the model that I've explained and start drawing
conclusions from it and then arguing about it and say, well, you know.
And so one of the things that people think I must find frustrating is when people argue against
whole body saying, yeah, but if you train the whole body, then you must create damage in all of
these places.
Therefore you must have more post workout CNS fatigue than you would do if your training is below a
splits and you're limiting the number of kind of muscle fibers in totality across all by the damage.
I'm not frustrated by that.
I'm pleased that people are actually thinking about Physiology and making predictions on what they
think a training program is going to do Fantastic.
Keep doing that and, you know, maybe in, you know, few months or years time you'll get to a sort of
place that actually explains something that I haven't explained.
That's why I've done this, not because I'm trying to, you know, do anything else.
I'm trying to get people to use Physiology to explain how training programs work.
So yeah, I think that we have got this risk of training a large number of muscle virus as a result
of using extra exercises and creating more total body damage, which then potentially would lead to a
bigger post workout central nervous system fatigue effect.
So yeah, I think that's an interesting an interesting problem to address.
Which effectively would increase the what the impact of that post work as CNS fatigue in a session
where it was still present, but it it wouldn't be increasing the timeline of creation for which it
was present for would it?
This is the interesting thing because if you have multiple muscles at different ends of the body, so
if you've like, you know, done biceps curls and then calf raises, you know, potentially there's some
total of that information from both of those sources is going to lead you to have quite a big CNFT
impact following day.
But as you correctly point out, those two muscles are on opposite sides of the body.
They aren't going to be impacting on each other in terms of their recovery rates.
So what you should find exactly as you just described is that again, you get more CNFT, but it
dissipates in the same period of time.
So really what it indicates is that training full body and then going back and try and train full
body the following day is likely to be extremely unsuccessful for that reason.
But you should still find that you're, you know, kind of every other day or you're three days a week
works OK for that, you know, for that, for that, for that explanation.
So again, you know, I'm, I think it's really cool when, you know, people actually walk through this
physiological framework and say, well, OK, if this is true, then that implies that that should then
be true.
And then that implies that that should be true.
Because ultimately what we've been struggling with for probably 30 or 40 years in hypertrophy
science is hypertrophy researchers thinking that they can do hypertrophy research without paying any
attention whatsoever to how Physiology works and.
They start talking about training muscles, which is impossible, you know, training muscle fibers.
They start talking about stretch mediated hypertroy when it's impossible.
We've only got sarcomerogenesis.
They start talking about creating hypertroy without, you know, with fatigue being present, even
though you're literally switching muscle fibers off and stopping them being, you know, exposed,
exposed to mechanical tension.
And they kind of just come up with, you know, magical thinking of reasons why these things can be
ignored.
And it's fantastic to see people starting to push back on that.
You know, and you've got people who who've sort of been exposed to how the Physiology works and
they've learned about it and they're now implementing that and saying actually, no, that hypothesis
that you're presenting can't possibly be true because, you know, size principle because mechanical
tension, because how fatigue works, because.
And it's great that we can be in this situation where all we're arguing about now is how the
Physiology actually works in the context of a straining, straining program.
You know, literally just a couple of years ago, you know, people would be saying, well, we believe
in metabolic stress.
We believe that muscle damage causes hypertrogen.
Like, I can't talk to you, you know, You're literally, you're literally making stuff up.
I can't talk to you, you know?
Now the arguments are what I would regard as interesting.
They're they're based on reality as it is, rather than how hypertroid researchers have been
pretending it is, you know, which is it's just so exciting for me to see that change.
It's fun.
It's fantastic.
So I don't get frustrated at all about these various different arguments because I see them as
necessary for us to figure out what's actually going on.
But yeah, so when I look at a full body program like this one, which we've been talking about, and I
see this huge amount of volume across lots of different parts of the body.
Yeah.
It has this interesting challenge whereby we're going to see potentially a huge amount of CNFT the
following day.
And, you know, he's not going to want to do very much, you know, maybe walk on the beach, whatever.
But, you know, potentially it could still more or less kind of work for a short period of time,
three days a week, you know.
But again, I think he is probably going to be doing a deload after four or five weeks and doing
something different.
This is this is, I think the plan for me when, you know, we started talking a lot about some of the
the silver area guys and, and you know, obviously we've been talking about Physiology for a long
time.
And this was the plan for me when I read it, I was like, this breaks what I believe.
This doesn't make sense to me.
And that was maybe maybe two years ago.
And I remember going back to it a year ago or so and I was like, oh, this might be how he's getting
away with some of this.
Like the, the fact that we've got, you know, the frontal plane versus the frontal, the, the sagittal
plane for us.
I'm like, it might actually just be that we're getting different muscle fibre damage here.
And yes, it's still high volume.
And yes, it's gonna exceed at least what a lot of people can can sufficiently do within a single
session, potentially exceeding their recoverability in, you know, successive sessions as well.
But it was that point for me.
I was like, oh, that's how this could make sense.
Yeah.
And I think with, with what we know now, we could do an even better job of really compartmentalizing
stuff so that you could absolutely do you know, your three sets and really push the activation away
from certain muscles.
You could change the resistance profile to make sure that you're, you know, you literally just do a
lateral raise instead of an overhead press in the frontal plane, but you could do the overhead press
in the frontal plane with a resistance profile.
So the hardest part is definitively below shoulder height and really push the activation across to
the middle delt.
You know, similarly, you could do your sagittal planes so that the it's a partial range of motion.
So you're working much more overhead and you again, really targeting the anterior delt.
And those little changes I think just have come with the development of the moment on research where
you can actually see what's happening.
So I think, you know, this is one of those areas where you can take a a program that's been written,
you know, sort of 70 years ago and actually make it better because of the data that we now have
available to us.
But fundamentally, it's still more or less the same.
Yeah.
Yeah.
I don't think there's anything else I wanted to comment on there.
So any other questions I had, is there anything else you thought was worth mentioning?
No, I think definitely people are going to exclaim how how much work it is when they when they put
the numbers together.
I mean, I think 14 exercises, three sets per exercises, absolutely crazy for most situations.
But, you know, coming back to the beginning, this was designed to be a short period of time, four or
five weeks, whatever.
So, you know, maybe that's how it worked.
Yeah.
So like I said at the start, I want to contrast this to previous plans where they were more
abbreviated, where there wasn't as much direct work for different muscle regions and stuff like
that.
And the goal obviously of a plan like this is, well, you'd think to try to provide a similar for as
much of the body as possible, even though there's some obvious shortcomings that you've pointed out.
And I, I guess the question is, OK, he didn't quite get there, but what might it look to get there?
You know, is it even worth trying to pursue that?
You know, what does it even mean to maximise?
What does it mean to write a plan that's that's actually going to, the people told me gains Maxine
nowadays, does it even matter?
Do you need to do this?
Could you?
He's doing 6 sets per muscle like you said, across two different exercises.
Could you just have done one set and got to the same place in the end?
Yeah, this is a really interesting question.
So what I'd like to do and you know, stop me if I start rambling, but what I'd like to do is just
try and sort of define the question that has been raised in this in this area and explain the key
training variables that would contribute to essentially arriving in the same place but more slowly
or producing A qualitatively different result.
Essentially, I think what is being argued is that you can kind of do almost any sensible strength
training program for hypertrophy and after a couple of years, you'll kind of arrive in more or less
the same place.
Now that's totally accepting the fact that you might get there quicker with some programs and more
slowly with others, but you'll end up in the same place because, you know, as natural bodybuilders,
you've kind of got a hard limit on what you can get.
So, you know, you just have to accept that and, you know, be done with it.
Now, I'm surprisingly sympathetic to this point of view.
People would go, well, you know, undermining your whole kind of, you know, philosophy.
Well, not really.
I'll explain why.
But I'm sympathetic to this view because I do think that, you know, the natural limit is a lot lower
than most people in today's day and age believe it is.
And the reason for that is because they're looking at what people are telling them today.
And as we've just spent an hour or so before this conversation talking about, my faith in humanity
is relatively low.
And so I don't actually take anybody's word for anything, but if you look back to the photographs
pre 1950, you know, you start to see people who look more, much more reasonable in terms of what is
achievable.
And again, remembering though, that those people were still genetically extremely gifted in the
purposes of building muscle.
So I think that there are going to be some training variables that do basically just mean that you
get a place more quickly or more slowly.
So for example, if you were to do a strength training program of the type that you construct, or I
would, I would write, you know, generally speaking, you could do one set for each muscle and you
could do that a couple of times a week.
And you would take a certain number of years and getting to a certain level of muscle mass.
And you're going to probably struggle to get much past that point.
You could get there a lot faster if you did two or three sets.
Volume, for all of the fuss that people make about it, is literally doing nothing other than getting
you to the same place slightly more quickly.
And I think that is the truism that I'm seeing in this debate at the moment, which is that, you
know, yeah, you can do, you know, this or that or the next, and you're going to end up in the same
place eventually, you know, and similarly then reason, and I explain the reason why this is not
always true in a moment, but in reason, you could argue the same thing for frequency.
You could do an exercise twice a week, or you could do it three times a week, or you could do it
every other day.
You're going to end up in the same place more or less after a couple of years of training in that
way.
You're not going to change the outcome particularly.
It's just going to be slower or quicker.
So in these examples, you have the same plan.
Effectively, you've got the same same plan and you're saying, OK, you could do an extra set, you
could do an extra 2 sets, you could do it twice a week, you could do it a third time a week, OK.
But it's basically the same effectively program and you're just changing the volume of the
frequency.
Essentially, if you if you are getting that hypertrophy across the week, then frequency is not going
to matter in the long term for what you're doing.
It's just going to get you there faster.
Doing 3 workouts a week will get you there faster than two.
Volume is the same.
Interested.
So obviously we're talking about, do these training variables get you to the same outcome or
different outcome.
Now we haven't.
I'm prepared to concede at the very, very top end.
You're going to see some differences there, and I'll explain why that isn't known.
But let me before I go and argue the tiny, tiny, tiny details, let me argue the opposite side of the
equation first.
So what I've just argued is where I think the argument is correct in so far as if you modify workout
volume or frequency within certain parameters, you're going to more or less end up in the same place
after a couple of years.
The opposite end of the spectrum, you've got things that absolutely 100% do matter.
And The Reg part program we just talked about is a really nice illustration of this.
If you do only a small number of exercises, so pick powerlifting for example, you're just doing your
squat bench dead, maybe a couple of other bits and pieces around the edges.
You are never going to be training certain muscle fibers and indeed certain muscle groups are just
not going to get switched on.
You're not going to get much gas stroke at all.
You're not going to get any long head of the triceps.
You know, you're going to get very limited rec fem and maybe even some hamstrings development is
going to lack so and then that that that's ignoring all of the little areas within muscles where new
mechanical matching means that you're just not switching on those particular areas of the muscles.
You don't need them.
If you contrast that with a program that has a much larger exercise variety like the program we've
just been talking about, and now suddenly you're getting much more complete development that is
qualitatively different.
You could do the powerlifting program forever and you would never get the hypertension in those
muscle fibers that you're training with the wider exercise variety issue.
So straight away, what I'm trying to illustrate here now to juxtapose with what we've just been
talking about, this is a excise selection as a training variable that 100% matters.
And if you don't get it right, you will not get to your maximum muscular potential.
There is no possible way of doing that.
It is physiologically impossible to grow muscle fibers that are not being used in an exercise.
Can't do it.
Now adding on to that, what we've now got to look at is the training frequency problem for the
specific exercises.
So for example, the example that we've used in conversation before now is where people are
programming leg extent that maybe they're doing an upper lower split.
I'm not bagging on upper lower splits for the moment.
I'm just using as an illustration.
If you're doing upper lower split and you're doing 2 lower body workouts a week and you do leg
extension in one of those in one of those workouts and in the other workout you do a sport or a leg
press or something like that.
OK, great.
What's going on?
The problem is that you're basically doing 1 * a week frequency for the unique muscle fibers that
are being trained in each of those exercises.
So in the case of the knee extension rec FEM literally is getting trained once a week.
So you'd need to be doing maintenance volumes at 3 or 4 sets to even keep it static.
Not many people are doing that really who are listening to this podcast.
You know, not many people are training with that kind of volume.
Maybe they're hitting five sets if they're doing up a lower split, but that's again, literally just
over maintenance.
That's toppy.
The same problem actually happens with the sarcomereogenesis, the stretch mediated hypertrophy from
the leg press or the squat, but you're not getting really from the knee extension because it's much
more contracted position exercise.
So you've basically got these two chunks of muscle mass which are going to grow for a couple of days
after each workout and then disappear by the time you get to the next one.
Again, the frequency interacting with the excise selection creates an issue for you.
So we're not just saying here that, you know, you've got to pick the right exercises.
That that's absolutely true.
Yeah.
You need a list of exercises that covers the whole body and make sure that you're not leaving
anything out.
Yes.
Point number one point #2 you actually have to train those twice a week.
You can't, you can't train one exercise once a week and expect to get all the benefits of that
exercise.
It doesn't work like that.
You know, there is a limit on how much central most you can send to the muscle.
And that means you're going to end up with a deficit.
What deficit you're going to see.
The deficit is going to be the fibers you don't need to use because they're not doing anything
useful for that movement.
So frequency interacts with excise selection very dramatically in those particular scenarios.
Finally, we've then got the post workout fatigue problem.
So or actually just.
Before you jump into that, let's make a comment on the exercise selection piece because this is a
conversation online all the time.
Someone will be like Oh well if that's the case if you train exercise more than once a week then how
did someone get a grow any muscle doing this thing once a week they were doing?
More than four sets a week.
Or usually so I had this conversation just before we jumped on our call today with some send me a
message like, oh, but you know, this program only does what each exercise once a week.
I was like, OK, show me, I'd like to see it and then show me.
And there was like, say one day had an incline, one day had an overhead and I'm like, OK, all this
all that's happening here is a Venn diagram like simply the the muscle fibers are active in both of
those exercises.
They're the ones that are going to get bigger, right?
And that is, so it's the.
Difference between the rate of hypertrophy and the end result.
So if you're basically doing 2 exercises that are overlapping, like incline press and overhead
press, then what's going to happen is you get a fast rate of hypertrophy in the fibers you're
training.
That's going to look great from a beginner's perspective.
It's going to look OK from an intermediate perspective.
When you hit the advanced level, what you're going to find is that the fibers that you're trying to
grow just aren't actually what they're going to get a little bit of growth after each workout, and
then they're going to just go back to normal by the time you get to the following week.
Which in that case, exercise variation.
It just makes no sense because you would actually be better off just doing the same exercise twice a
week instead of 1 exercise once and now they exercise once because anything that's unique to that
exercise like you just point out, you just don't.
And then you floss the 10 people, you change it again.
Excellent selection is a plateau.
Plateau is the wrong word, is a is a maximum muscular potential modifier volume is not.
So what we're, what we're saying here is that when you're talking about this problem, which is, you
know, do all programs more or less end up in the same place after a couple of years of hard
training?
No, they don't.
Why don't they?
They don't because ultimately there are certain training variables that don't matter for that and
there are certain training variables that do volume and within certain parameters, frequency is not
going to change where you end up, but excise selection absolutely is going to change where you end
up.
And frequency of that exercise selection is also going to change where you end up.
Now, the third thing that's going to change where you end up is whether you're training with large
amounts of CNS fatigue or not.
So if you're doing a workout and you're hitting high levels of you're experiencing high levels of
CNSD either because you're doing that as a matter of course, maybe maybe you've just got in a habit
of taking short risk periods.
I mean, it doesn't have to be something about accumulated post workout fatigue, just training with
short risk periods so you don't hit the highest level of recruitment.
You can't train those fibers.
Same thing happens if you are training in a state of constant accumulated fatigue.
This is an interesting one because this is kind of where you say, well will a bro split get me to
the same place as one of your full body routines as long long as I do the same exercise selection
and butt loads of volume?
No it won't because you hit the exact same problem for a different reason.
Yes, you've got your exercise selection.
Yes, you're doing enough sets per workout to make sure you carry over from one workout to the next.
But you are missing the top level of recruitment because you're constantly in a state of muscle
damage.
Therefore you've got post workout CNSD, therefore you're not actually training the top level of the
muscle in those situations.
So ultimately there are variables that matter and there are variables that don't matter, and I think
we just got to divide those out.
So that last point you just made with the CNS fatigue, So am I correct in saying this is going to be
so controversial to say that any split where you have two consecutive days is likely going to be
inferior in total ceiling of muscle mass to a split that has at least a rest day between sessions?
Well, I think, I think generally that's going to be true, but you have to bear in mind that if
somebody is doing an upper, lower split and training on consecutive days, but they are training in a
way that minimizes the amount.
Of almost no one would be like that would be the exception.
Well, I, I don't know that's necessarily true.
I think there are people out there who have been, you know, looking at the Physiology, they've been
looking at the fatigue.
They understand that fatigue is a problem and they've started to, you know, do maybe one or two
sets.
Yes, but that that would be the only, only exception to what I've just said.
Then you see if you're doing one or two.
Sets I think a lot of people are starting to train like that.
They're doing a couple of sets per muscle group and upper lower split and they're doing very little
in the gym.
You know, they're, they're going in, they're doing maybe, you know, sort of maybe they're doing a
back exercise and, and a, some sort of press and then they might do a biceps curl and maybe a
triceps extension.
They do a couple of sets of each of those.
And OK, maybe you could argue that triceps are not being, you know, sort of avoiding the problem,
but we're not really interested in localized muscle damage issues at this point.
We're more interested in is this going to create a problem for my lower body workout the following
day The.
Following day and.
I don't think it would.
Do you know I?
That would have to be an upper lower 6 times per week probably to be feasible, wouldn't you say?
You could still do that twice a week.
Absolutely.
Because you think about it with a small on set, you need to do yeah, if you're repeating, if you're
doing a, if you're, if you're, if you're only doing the same upper body and same lower body workouts
every time, you could do that.
I mean, you could absolutely do.
I mean, imagine, imagine just taking, take, take a really, really solid full body program of say 12
or so exercises, which covers the whole body, which you might split it, split it into two halves of
6 exercises each and then do them on, you know, only four days a week.
You're absolutely going to make progress.
And this is a really, really nice example because a lot of people will look at that six exercises of
one set each twice a week and go, why would I do something that basic?
Well, actually that will get you.
That will get you to your maximum muscular potential.
It'll get you there slower, but it will get.
It'll get you further than the.
It'll get you further down the Bruce bit.
Well, and it'll get further than a lot of other programs.
Will that change?
I mean, so many people will go, oh, I need to do a complicated upper lower split and I need to do
different exercises on, you know, my first upper body workout for my second upper body workout.
Like you won't get as far by doing that.
You might get.
There is an inferior way of programming it.
Inferior way of programming, if you want to maximize where you're going, where you get to maximum
level of hypertrophy you can get to is determined by the breadth of exercises that you're doing that
still have net hypertrophy across all of those regions every single week.
That's it.
That's the answer.
That is like, say that again because that's that's everything summed up in a sentence.
Where you're going to get to your ultimate hypertrophy destination is dependent on the number of
exercises or different exercises, the exercise variety that you're doing, and whether or not those
exercises are each getting net hypertrophy across the week.
Which means basically you're going to need to train them twice a week at least.
And one without the other does not matter.
There's no point, like you said, no point having this extensive list of exercises, but half of them
are being trained once a week as two sets.
Can't do it.
Yeah, you absolutely have to have the frequency and the exercise selection thing nailed down
together.
If you get that, then your destination will be the same.
So again, people are going to think, oh, no, he's undermining everything he's saying because he used
to say that full body three times a week is perfect or every other day.
But no, I literally just tell you what the model says.
So the physiological model will tell you that your hypertrophy rate will be faster if you do full
body every other day.
I was dragged kicking and screaming into that admission not too long ago.
I prefer three days a week.
But, you know, it doesn't matter.
The point is that the Physiology tells us where we go.
If you do 3, three days a week full body or if you do two days a week full body with exactly the
same, let's say we just pick a single workout and do it three times a week or we do it or every
other day, or you do it twice a week, you will get to the same place eventually.
You will just get there faster if you do the three day or the every other day.
So there's some really cool validity in this argument and I think hopefully some people will have to
now readjust how they think about hypertrophy in general because I think most of the time
hypertrophy researchers are extremely guilty of this.
Most of the time people just think of hypertrophy as being like better or worse, more or less.
That's that's it.
There's no kind of like, you know, difference between how fast you're going and how far you can go.
You know, now what we're saying here is that this argument that's being, you know, kind of engaged
in online at the moment is a brilliant insight into the fact that there is a difference between how
fast you go and where you get to.
So how far you can go or how fast you go.
And exercise selection with appropriate frequency will get you to the maximum possible place you can
go.
Things like volume are going to do absolutely nothing for you.
They're not going to get you, sorry, in terms of where you want to go.
They're not going to get you there, you know, to a different location.
They're just going to get you wherever you're going faster.
So it's fascinating, again, that hypertrophy researchers do tend to focus on volume.
And it's like, well, actually, you know, in the long term, it's not going to be that interesting as
a training variable as exercise selection.
Yeah, it comes back to that exercise selection.
I think I said on the previous podcast, the way I program is I always start by writing out the list
of what exercises do I need and then I decide and volume and frequency and everything else.
But if you don't start with that, like that is, that's the variable.
That's what you said here.
That is the variable that's going to determine where you end up.
There's your.
Boundary condition?
How quickly?
They are absolutely your boundary conditions.
Your boundary conditions are the exercise selection that covers the whole body as far as you want
to.
Then secondarily, you've got to go.
I need to make sure these exercises are all being trained twice a week.
After that, once you've nailed those two things down, your options now open out and you can go.
These two things being true, you know, those are my conditions of continuing.
Now I can say, well, you know, I can look at upper body, sorry, upper lower, I can look at full
body.
I can, you know, choose how I want to structure.
But what's really interesting is that this is how the programs that you've been presenting to us
actually worked.
So for example, the Clancy Ross, whereas like you started out with a full body program, but then as
it got too big, it got split out across 2 days.
And it's like, well, the exercise selection was the driver, primary driver, the frequency and the
volume are kind of just like once you've got that nailed down, you would then move on to those
questions.
Secondarily, so many questions I get are about what split should I use or those those questions are
going away now that I've got now I said the weekly net stimulus model has been the most amazing
thing for avoiding questions about training.
If I did it literally for no other reason, it would have been for that.
But so yeah, if everyone wants to ask about training splits and about volume or how many sets should
I do?
And I'm like, you've had, you haven't answered the first first question, which is which exercises
should I do and how do I do those twice a week?
You know, because if somebody has personal requirements or schedule based requirements that mean
they can only go to the gym twice a week, they don't have any options.
They have no options.
It's like you want to go to the gym twice a week, then you are doing a full body program, identical
workout every single time you go to the gym.
No discussion, no argument.
There's nothing you can do, because anything else you do is going to be massively inferior to that.
But any two way split again upper, lower four times a week Is is the exact same thing those upper
and those lower sessions.
Exactly.
You have to do the same session every single time.
You could literally push the upper lower split four days a week to the absolute limit where you're
doing 5 sets per exercise.
And you could literally just about make that work as a, it would like function like a bro split in a
way.
Because you would end up with literally just getting to the next workout in a positive state and
you'd be in a constant state of CNST all the time.
And because of your massive amounts of massive damage that you're creating.
So you wouldn't get to your maximum potential, but you would just about make it work From an excise
selection and a frequency point of view, you would be suffering from the top end of the motive pool
point of.
View and it's not even just upper lower that suffers from this.
I see this with full body programming.
There needs to be a word for a full body or upper lower program which is programmed like a bro split
where they have a full body plan ABC and ABC.
Can't work.
Exactly.
And they put a leg extension on on B and a hack squat and a barbell squat on A&C.
And it's like, well, hang on, this is a dry split.
Yes, it is again full body AB repeating as in a B, A/B, A/B is brilliant and it I think it's a
really, really enjoyable split that worked long term because.
It's the most flexible split you can do.
For me, it has one of the most enjoyable aspects to it because you're not grinding away every single
time you go out there.
You're not trying to hit the same exercise for the same numbers.
So from a psychological point of view, I've been training several years and you're getting old like
I am.
It's really nice to go in the gym and not to do exactly the same thing every single time.
You have a an alternating split.
Yeah, ABC cannot work because you're limited to three sets and that isn't going to get you from one
week to the next.
Now an interesting debate to do to, to move this onwards a little bit would be to say, well, what if
somebody's doing two different squat variations?
You know, I mean, can we, can we just alternate between front squat and back squat, for example?
I mean with that, that I think that's getting very close to being able to say, well, that's
basically the same exercise more or less.
Yeah, Effectively, I think we've said this in the past.
All we're talking about is an exercise which is, which has effectively the same motive.
Well, I guess muscle fibers are active.
And if that happens to be two exercises that have a different name, they're effectively the same
exercise.
Well, that's still going to be sufficient.
And like a lateral raise and I over had pressed in the frontal plane with peak forces below
shoulder.
I mean, essentially it's going to give you for the muscle you're training the same thing.
So I think there's this this kind of, and I guess really if you want to take it to the absolute
extreme level, it's like having a couple of different gyms that you go to and they've all got
different branded machines and you know, you're basically doing the same movement button on every
single machine.
You can kind of take things to an extreme level, but I think we probably sort of encapsulate, relate
to that problem relatively well at this point.
And hopefully that's given some clarity around this argument that we're seeing at the moment, which
is that, you know, just do a good training program and you'll end up in the same place eventually.
Well, no, you won't.
You might, but you don't necessarily.
You might not necessarily end up there.
It really depends on what category of training program your particular program falls into.
You know, does it suffer from a lack of exercise variety?
Is it doing exercises too infrequently or does it have too much volume?
So you're going too much CNSD or any other thing that might give you too much CNSD, like, you know,
sort of excessive advanced training techniques or you know, drop sets and that kind of thing.
Or maybe you're doing short rest periods.
As I say, whatever it might be, you end up with a like a vote in agreement.
You don't train all the muscle fibers.
If you're falling into any of those traps, then you won't get to the same place as somebody else
who's doing the program that, you know, kind of allows them to maximize their muscular potential.
But if you're listening to this podcast and you're doing kind of some sort of full body program that
repeats and exercise twice a week, if you're doing an upper lower split that's doing the same
workout, same upper lower workouts, same same upper workouts, same lower workouts, then chances are
then you will end up essentially in the same meanness.
So yeah, so you can all stop asking about how many sets you should do.
Well, you know, you made an interesting point actually on that.
And the conversation has shifted because the com, the question was always what's the best split?
Should I do this split or this split?
And then the question evolved to how many sets do I just then do one set?
Should I do 2?
How how many sets can I recover from?
And the question that you said, and, and I'm seeing this all the time now is, is X exercise enough?
And there's two variants of that question.
Is leg extension enough for my quotes?
Or the other variant of that question is, is leg extension enough to maximize growth in my quads?
And those are two different questions.
And it's kind of this whole topic question of will it get me to the same place or will it get me
moving forwards at the same pace?
And it all comes back to exercise selection.
So is leg extensions enough?
Yeah, sure.
If you're doing them with more than five sets once a week, you're doing them twice a week.
Yes.
Is it enough to maximize growth?
No, as you've just pointed out before.
So this is really this conversation in a nutshell.
It's like, well, will all programs get me to the same point?
Will leg extension get me the same point?
Will Lake Ascension and the Lake Chris getting to the same point?
It depends on excise selection, that is.
That is a foundational piece in this entire conversation.
And it's so interesting that we do see a huge amount of exercise variety in many of these silver era
programs.
You know, there's a lot of variety in in most of them.
You know, very, very large amount of exercise variety, generally very small number of sets.
As you pointed out, when we started out on this little project and when we looked at some of the
oldest programs, they didn't even have a set, set system.
Yes, exactly.
You know the word maths.
Selection is the thing.
It's like you just have this list of exercises that you did and you just did a single set for every
single one because the point is exercise selection, it's not about.
And yet now we've got people who are, you know, kind of just doing a couple of exercises in our
session or they're trying to do multiple sets.
And I think maybe as the set, you know, obsession, the volume obsession has grown.
The exercise selection has necessarily shrunk because people have, you know, kind of lost exercise
variety in order to add volume.
And it's quite clear that if you want to maximize your ultimate muscular potential, then you can't
do that without a wide variety of exercise that you know in your program.
And ultimately that may mean that you see slightly slower progress, especially as you're seeking
that specific goal, simply because you have to spread out your energy across a wider number of
places.
I think it's, I think it's a really interesting question, a really interesting debate.
I think it's hopefully changed the way that people see things, but I do fear now that my entire kind
of feed is going to be full of people asking me exactly which exercises to do.
Which should be fair.
I think is, is people asking better questions.
Like that's kind of what we said is, hey, if you want to program well, I would always say to my
mentoring clients, the most important thing for you to understand in all this.
Once you understand fatigue and limitations to volume, although arguably that probably comes second
anyway.
But the most important thing for you to actually learn here is simply whether that's neuromechanical
matching or exercise selection, whatever you want to call it.
It's just understanding what exercises are actually going to train, what I want to train.
Once you've learned that, like your ability to program well like that, that's the most important
skill for you.
Yeah, I think that's probably right.
You know, I think and then really once people have a foundation of, you know, what we know about
various different movement patterns and how they use different muscles, that's when you can start
see a little bit of experimentation coming in, people trying different things.
And just as a kind of observation on this, it's very easy because of the huge amount of equipment
that's available to us in today's day and age to as you, I think you posted a video recently on
Instagram actually, of you messing around with a new exercise and inventing it as a kind of a new
influencer project.
That that's, that's such a great example because you can go to a gym and you can kind of turn around
in a different direction and give a cable over your head and suddenly you've got a new exercise.
I'm, I'm not, I'm not criticizing people for doing this, by the way.
I'm just, you know, kind of you can, you can, you can go to a gym and you can play around with
equipment and you can find something.
Now, I'm not going to discourage that.
I'm absolutely not going to discourage that.
That's a, that's a thing that we see going back to, you know, we literally had one today where he's
doing that weird biceps curve with his hands together.
I mean, like, fine, you know, experiment, have fun, play around with stuff, see if it can make some
work.
That's cool.
The the two things I would say is if you want to actually make a breakthrough and find something
that works, then look at the physiological data that we've got.
Look at the moment Toms, look at what's going on.
Look at how you can reduce muscle mass in an exercise to try and focus on another specific area of
the body.
Look at ways of doing that and work with Physiology rather than working against it.
Secondly, tied onto this, bear in mind that almost every creative or inventive way of training a
muscle is probably going to have a low degree of stability, stability unless you work really hard to
fix that problem.
So what I'm saying there is that because of the way cables work and because of the way the equipment
setups work, it's easier to get a weird cable angle or a, you know, different way of doing something
if you reduce stability because you can just move in a different direction, stand somewhere else,
you know, have the cable, and you're going to massively reduce stability as a result.
You're not going to really be doing anything for that muscle.
Even if you find a way to, you know, target a particular area of the body which is perhaps
previously not been targeted effectively, you're not going to get the maximum effect from the muscle
that you're training in that way.
So it's a 2 step process yes Find the thing based on Physiology that you're interested in training.
Fantastic.
Now figure out a way to make that stable.
Most people just want to bank when they get to the first thing they go.
Oh, I've found this new thing that trains this and I can feel it's different and I'm really excited
about it.
I'm going to share this with the world and I'm going to name it after myself, you know because
everybody names after me.
I haven't even named anything after myself and I'm, you know, I find that really funny because you
know, kind of created the entire model of how hypertroid work, you know, and then I haven't named
anything after myself.
But these people, you know, play around with a cable and suddenly they've named after themselves.
Cool, Go to the next level and stabilize it.
You know, get the bench in the right place, get the cable pointing in the right direction, get your
physically set up so that you maximize that you get those two things right.
You can actually start to get to an interesting exercise selection, you know, and again, get to that
point.
Fantastic, you know, do a victory lap.
Brilliant.
Well done.
You know, you've added something, but I think most of those two steps are important because, as I
say, it's really easy to create an exercise that is different if you just mess around with cables
and have no stability.
Yeah, compare that with stability and now I'm paying attention to what you're doing because you've
actually done something that is fundamentally interesting at that point is adding rather than just
being a distraction.
Hopefully I'm, I'm hope nobody, I'm being a little bit flippant here, but hopefully and people
understand that I'm not being critical and I'm not discouraging this practice.
I really think experimentation.
I mean, I've done this a dozen times and brought it to you and asked you what you thought about it
and the way I would go about exercise tweets.
And you know, ultimately that's the way I view these things as most things are not new yet, like
most exercises are not new.
All you've done generally or when I've tried to playground with an exercise is I've looked at how do
I take an exercise and knock off the bit of that exercise which is not actually training the part of
the muscle I want to train which.
Is, yeah, sort of.
The whole calf raise thing came from where people went from doing normal standing calf raises or toe
presses and leg press suddenly just cut the top half of the range of motion off and it's
transformational.
Exactly that.
That was fantastic.
And that was actually really simple when you think about it.
No cables required.
Precisely.
Fantastic adjustment.
And then the second bit that I would normally look at is how do I just make this more stable?
I think it's two step process.
It's a 2 step process and I think a lot of people, as I say, rush to share with the world their new
discovery and they don't take the necessary time to get the stability nailed down.
And I think ultimately where we see, you know, like, you know, just pick, pick the hip thrust.
You know, I mean, OK, you could argue that there are sort of glute bridge type exercises going back
into the, you know, sort of maybe hundreds of years ago, but obviously Brett Contreras popularized
the hip thrust and like it or not, but he's now associated with that.
And I think you've done an amazing job in popularizing a really, really valuable exercise that
solves a very clear problem, which is that, you know, glute training was focused almost exclusively
on stretch position instead of contract position where the muscle has best leverage.
If you want like the perfect example of somebody who created an exercise using physiological
principles and actually I would say neuro mechanical matching before it was called, before it even
had a name.
In fact, creating an exercise which is also very, very stable, as you can see by the monstrous
amounts of weight that people can lift with that exercise.
Even on a bench, even before you get to the machines that have been made, you can lift monstrous
amounts of weight on those machines on the bench with a barbell.
That is a perfect example of a really like the perhaps most creative exercise invention creation
that we've seen in the modern era.
Really when I see, when I compare that with, you know, the cable exercises done standing, it's
different.
Have you seen, I forget what the name is for this exercise, but it was meant to be like the perfect
curl and it was like a cable curl where you kind of change and swing your body position as as you're
performing the curls.
You kind of start from like.
Back that's a perfect a perfect example of of what I would be trying to avoid happening.
So you know that that that stabilization requirement from the full body is the is the disadvantage
that we're seeing.
So, you know, what we're trying to do in the situations is find a way to, yes, physiologically
identify the muscle that we're trying to target and then build on that by, you know, sort of
stabilizing things as much as we possibly can.
And I think the, you know, yes, the amount of weight you're going to lift is going to vary between
muscle groups, obviously, but it's a really good litmus test.
You know, if somebody like Brett invents an exercise and you've got people here thrusting 700 lbs,
that's a pretty good indicator really.
That is a very stable exercise.
You're not, you're not going to move that kind of weight to the exercise is not stable.
So if, on the other hand, if you've got a cable and you're struggling to control a small amount of
weight to get the exercise movement pattern you want, that's the opposite problem.
Now I'm not, I'm not bagging on cable.
They just suffer from this problem more than any other implement.
Yes, you can have cable exercises that work brilliantly.
You have to put the work in to get the stability and there are people doing that.
I've seen a couple of examples where people have set benches up, they've set the equipment up,
they've got the angles right and they've worked hard to get an exercise that works.
I'm not criticizing them at all.
You know, I'm illustrating the point that, you know, we need that stability to maximise motor unit
equipment.
So hopefully people now have a road map that when they're, you know, messing around in the gym and
they want to play around with this stuff, they do take that two step process and produce something
that we can use.
Yeah.
So guys, hopefully I've enjoyed this conversation and it's given you a bit to think about as to how
to get to your final destination.
And we'll all programs get you there And you know, potentially the answer is no, but there's some
specific variables here that matter more than others.
To conclude, can you repeat?
I got you to repeat it twice before but if if this can be the one take away I would be so happy
because this is like the crux of how to program well.
So the destination you get to, so your, your muscular destination, if we you want to terminology
your muscular destination, your ultimate muscular destination is going to depend on the exercise
selection that you have in your program and the frequency of those exercises.
So you're not going to get to your maximum muscular potential by doing a smaller variety of
exercises and doing those exercises less frequently.
You need and a combination of the exercise variety and doing those exercises individually at least
twice a week.
Thank you.
Thank you everyone for joining in and we hope you'll join us for another episode next week.