Episode: 013 Neuromechanical Matching: Everything you need to know (but few do)
URL: https://open.spotify.com/episode/278QXo3u23seLp1atWhqUg
Published: 2025-08-18
================================================================================

Welcome back everyone to another episode.
Thank you for joining us.
We appreciate all of you as always.
Chris, how are you doing today?
I'm doing very well.
Thanks, Jake.
How are you?
I'm also doing very well.
I, I'm doing very, very well because I'm actually staying somewhere with lots of very good cafes and
it's only 10:00 in the morning and I've had five or six coffee so far.
So if I'm talking double speed, that's why.
So apologies in advance to everyone.
You guys know the drill.
We're gonna unpack a topic which is a AB topic.
It's a topic that gets talked about a lot and I think it gets talked about a lot with a lot of
confusion.
So it is going to be hopefully an interesting episode for you all.
If you are not 6 coffees that coffees deep like I am, then maybe hit pause and go get one because it
might help you.
But obviously to get started I'm going to introduce us to a bit of a silver area workout plan.
We'll have a good chat and then we'll jump into the meat and potatoes of the episode.
So we have talked about this guy before.
So this is period radar.
So I think a couple of weeks ago, I think 2 episodes back perhaps, I touched on one of his plans.
I briefly mentioned who he was.
Superior was a very influential figure of the silver era.
He started Iron Man magazine.
A lot of people I'm assuming are familiar with Iron Man and I believe Iron Man is still running.
Don't quote me on that, but I believe it is, it obviously has changed hands over that time, but he I
believe he, he ran it and, and was the chief editor whatever for I believe 50 years or thereabouts.
So very significant and one of the most influential magazines of that time period.
I think he, he started it in, in the, he's so very, very, very early on and he introduced us, I
touched on it last time, but he did introduce us to a few different methods and, and sort of
popularized them.
So a lot of like rest pause and breathing, like the breathing squats and, and stuff like that.
And I'm not going to talk about those today, but I'm sure at some point we might touch on them in
future episodes.
But in his, he published sort of a lot of different kind of books, a lot of different plans,
predominantly stuff around like barbells and dumbbells.
Because obviously this is pretty early on in that time period.
And the plan we talk thinking about today is in fact, let me just just quickly jump back for a
moment.
I think in a previous episode, maybe last week, I talked or we talked about sort of the idea of, of
rotating exercises.
And we made the point that it kind of makes sense probably to add exercises in rather than take
exercises out on one's lifting journey.
And this is really well emphasized in a lot of these types of plans.
So the plan we're gonna talk about here is what he, I, I believe he coined it an advanced beginner
routine.
So I suppose we will call that intermediate.
And if you were to compare this quote UN quote intermediate plan to a total beginner plan, it's very
similar, but with more exercises added in.
So that's kind of the, the trajectory that people like Piru were going on where it's like, OK,
beginners here's, you know, 8/10/12 exercises for you do and then more intermediate advanced, you
know, here's 12/14/15 exercise for you to do.
And they just sort of add in exercises over time.
So this is the advanced beginning routine.
This was published in his Iron Man barbell course in early 50s.
And this was of course, full body, as most of these plans at this point in time were.
And it was to be done three times a week.
Now, as I've sort of mentioned in the past, it was a little bit of liberty over that.
And often people like Perry would talk about, OK, if you're struggling with that, maybe you juice it
down to twice a week.
So there was always like a little bit of, you know, variability in individualisation to some of this
stuff.
So the plan itself, we start off with a barbell curl, bearing in mind this is, like I said, mostly
barbells.
I think there's maybe a couple of dumbbell, but it's almost all barbell work.
So we start off with a barbell curl and everything here is three sets.
OK, So we do barbell curl, three sets, 8 to 10.
Then we go into a reverse curl, three sets, 8 to 10.
And then we've got a overhead press, some military press style, three sets, 8 to 10.
Then we've got a behind the neck, so we've gone sort of closer grip, a little bit more sagittal to
frontal.
And then we go to a barbell bench, three sets of eight to 10, a bent over barbell row, three sets of
eight to 10 heels, elevated squat.
Now for the lower body exercises, he did suggest 8 to 15.
You know, bear in mind some of this is coming out of convenience in terms of the equipment they've
got, whether people have squat stands, whether they're trying to, to leverage the bar up.
So there's some of that playing into it.
And then we have this interesting.
He actually coined it.
Oh, he, I think he named it after himself, but it was an isometric chest pull, he called it where
basically you had like a bar that you could hold onto a vertical bar somewhere and you would hold
around head height, neck height, and you would do an isometric basically squeezing the, the chest
together in this sort of downwards pulling motion.
And he programmed that for I believe he said like 20 squeezes.
So I guess this is like a, a second squeeze type thing.
It was a little bit vague.
The instructions there.
He did provide a diagram, but it was, it still was a little bit vague.
So that's an interesting and he did include this exercise and quite a lot of his plans.
And then we went into a stiff leg deadlift.
Sorry, we did the no, we did stiff leg deadlift.
And then he went back to the isometric chess pool.
So he actually did the chess pool twice.
Perhaps he, he enjoyed it because it was named after himself, I'm not sure.
And then we finished with sit ups, side bends and standing calf phrases.
And interesting point that he made on the standing calf phrase is he said, if you're doing this
exercise, it is better if you're going to do three sets because obviously earlier sometimes they
would do single sets and it goes, if you're doing this with three sets, do one set with your toes
pointed out.
Do 1 of pointed in to begin with.
Do one set with your toes neutral, just sticking straight ahead and then do one set with your toes
pointing outwards.
So in neutral out.
And now is the end of the plan.
Now, I think that's an interesting note.
We'll talk about that in a moment.
But before we do, what do you make of that?
It's a, it's a pretty comprehensive plan, but what do you make of it?
Well.
Yeah, I mean, there's some interesting things to unpack here.
I mean, I find I was, I was smiling when you were talking about the the isometric chest pull because
I was thinking to myself, they've even gone to the trouble of getting a bar set up in a position
where they could do pull ups and they don't do them.
And I'm like, you know, what is this aversion that these guys have with pull ups?
They just don't like them.
But yeah, that would be again, a comment that I make almost every time we look at one of these
programs is that there doesn't seem to be anything resembling a wide grip pull up, which would give
you really great lower lat development.
There is actually only the bent over barbell row, which I would expect to be a wide grip.
So actually the lat work is very diminished in this program because it would really you wouldn't
have either the sagittal or the frontal, you'd just have transverse plane pulling more or less.
So I think there's definitely a deficit of lat work.
I mean, they do have a stiff leg deadlift, but again, a stiff leg and it's obviously our body
focused.
So a little bit I think that, you know, kind of deficient.
I think in terms of the other kind of comments, obviously, you know, there's a tremendous amount of
volume for the biceps in this program, which really does kind of or elbow flexors, which does look a
little bit strange.
You know, especially done first.
It looks like you're trying to do this three times a week with six sets for the elbow flexors, I
think will be very toppy, you know, especially in that moderate Rep range.
Similarly, we've got a lot of overhead pressing, although perhaps with sagittal and frontal planes
we're getting a big kind of shift from middle delt in the frontal to anterior delt, maybe even
tubicular Peck in the sagittal.
So maybe that's not quite so bad.
I suspect the elbow flexor, there's probably quite a lot of crossover there, other bits and pieces.
Just noticing I guess that we do have a deadlift variation in this program, which in many of the
others that we talked about we didn't have.
And I always said I don't understand why you again, you can very easily set up a bullet bar.
You can very easily put a barbell on the ground.
Why don't we have more deadlifts?
Why don't we have more pull ups, you know, in these programs?
And it's interesting to see that we do have that deadlift variation here.
Of course, the comment that you made about the car phrases is is called as well because we can see
that, you know, kind of looking for sort of different parts of the gastrop by training with
different foot positions, you know, something that only really has been validated in very recent
research studies.
So, you know, that will be my starting kind of set of comments.
I mean, I could I could carry on talking about exercise variation because it's obviously very
interesting that not only do we have a lot of volume for the old reflexes, we do have two very
distinct exercises for the old reflexes.
One that is much more brachioradialis focused with the pronation, one that's much more biceps
brachifocus to a degree with that supernation.
So, you know, I think there's there's some interesting points there that will segue us into what I
want to talk about.
Ultimately, I think this is material that we have largely commented on before, you know, the excise
selection, a lot of variety, but with some really big gaping holes according to certain exercises or
muscle groups that they don't particularly like training.
You know, I think this is a very much a continuation of the kind of material that we've seen.
What do you think that isometric chest pull?
So assuming so this is a fairly high position.
It's almost like a pullover in a sense, if you think about it right, Like it's the starting point of
a pullover.
Well, you've seen the diagram and I haven't.
So if you're telling me it looks like a pullover, then it looks like a pullover.
Well, if you think about the function that he's doing, if if your hands are very high up and you're
doing this isometric pull down, then that would be relatively similar to what's happening in the
start of a pullover.
Yeah.
And if that's, if that's sagittal plane, then I think you're going to get obviously a lot of sternal
PEC definitely or coastal rather, sorry, not sternal.
You're going to get a lot of coastal PEC and you're going to get a lot of atrocious backy long head
and obviously a big chunk of posterior deltoid.
So, you know, I think that would be an interesting addition to the program.
I mean, I mean, obviously he has probably picked that or developed that because he felt that it
attacked one of his weaknesses or was something that worked for him, maybe had better leverages in
certain muscles that allowed him to benefit more from that exercise.
I don't think it's something that I would immediately jump on and go, oh, this is amazing.
We should all be doing, You know, I can see why it fits in this program.
Probably not twice, but let's see what's in the phone.
I know I do find that funny.
The only exercise you paid it twice.
I guess what I'm finding interesting here is we've got like the the curl, like you said, we've got a
good biases Brachi exercise and then we've got a focus and Brachi radialis.
Then if if we look at shoulders, we've got this saturnal overhead press and then we've got the the
frontal plan.
So he's doing quite well in, in, you know, almost in biasing out the elbow flexes, biasing out the
the shoulders.
And then we get to the chest and we've got, you know, you've got even in the clavicular chest and
the sagittal overhead, then you've got sagittal with the the I'm not saying what am I saying?
You've got.
Sternal with the.
I can see I can.
See it now that you've now that you've said it, I can see it.
So that the bench press you've probably got a transverse plane movement.
So you're hitting sternal with a little bit of clavicular and or not a little bit, quite a bit of
clavicular and and coastal weight alongside it.
Then with the overhead press in the surgical plane you've got clavicular nailed down and then with
the this isometric you've got the coastal part nailed down.
Now I can.
Now that you've mentioned it, I can see how the PEC development also fits in the same pattern as the
delt development and the biceps development or the algo flex development that I was mentioning that
makes.
Sense and then it's got the cars sorted out.
So we're just really lacking first and foremost with back.
The solvable problems of their day, yeah, with the equipment that they had available to them.
I don't understand why they didn't train lats properly.
Yeah, that that that really does kind of always glitch for me.
Yeah.
Most of the other stuff that they're missing is stuff that they just couldn't really do.
Couldn't do it feasibly.
Yeah, exactly.
So aside from from that, like you're saying, with what they had access to, this is a fairly well
thought out plan I would say.
It definitely indicates that he has been able to perceive the results of the training that he's been
programming in the past and gathered together a selection of exercises that fit really, really well.
You know, this is always the point that we're making, which is that if you don't have the anabolic
stimulus in in place, then you can look at what is happening with people and your own training and
other people's training and you can see what it's doing over a number of years.
And you don't ever have that confusing, confounding problem of the anabolics creating growth
everywhere.
And I think this is something I'm just going to keep repeating and repeating and repeating until,
you know, enough people realize that it's a problem that we've got to deal with, you know?
And I think there's this tendency for people to then start arguing about, you know, is this person
natural?
Is that person natural?
We, you just, I don't think the argument even goes anywhere.
It's like you just go back to the pictures of people that we've got or the knowledge of the people
that we've got that didn't have that problem.
And you'd immediately jump, you know, miles ahead of where you were previously in terms of your
understanding of this kind of thing, because you're putting yourself in a position where they didn't
have the problem at all.
You know, you can, of course, you can reduce the extent of the problem in your analysis today.
You can, but you can't remove it completely.
And those guys just didn't even have it.
So I think this is really kind of what we're trying to do here, is bring this material more into the
public domain, get people thinking about it, talking about understanding, because ultimately it
solves a problem that we have that we probably can't actually solve at the moment.
You know, in in today's day and age, the only thing we can do is look back and benefit from the fact
that they didn't have it.
That's the only real way I think that we can move forward on this stuff.
Yeah.
Exactly, so we've eased people in with a plan.
Hopefully everyone's settled in, have their coffee buckled up.
What's our topic for today?
So we're going to talk about the neuro mechanical matching principle.
And the reason for talking about this today is that there is currently obviously a lot of debate
about it, but also the debate I believe, is occurring simply because people don't understand some of
the very basics about it.
So this is not intended to be a discussion of new mechanical matching that goes into extreme amounts
of complex detail.
It's designed to try and see where people are misunderstanding the literature.
I don't want to derail you this quickly into the conversation, but I think what you've just
introduced there is a really important point for people to think about even before we go deeper in
that so many of the arguments and the conversations that do happen online happen because people
don't actually understand what it is that they're talking about.
And it, you know, I've seen this over even we don't get into detail, but even, you know, people talk
about stuff that we've been talking about over the last few weeks and making it clear that they
haven't even listened to the episodes and just said, so I've heard on the Grapevine that Kristen
Jacobs said this and then presenting an argument against it.
You know, we obviously don't name names unless it's a positive thing as well.
But one thing that actually Kassem said to me one time was you get a lot further in life if you
iron, what do you call it?
Ironclad or Iron Man someone's argument instead of straw man it.
And that stuck out to me.
I was like, you know what, actually, that is really good advice.
If you actually genuinely want to find what's true, take the opposing viewpoint and make it as as
indestructible as you can give it as like try to make the case, see if there's any truth to it
before you try to straw a manner and tear it down and, and discredit it.
And I think that's kind of what we want to do here is show actually, you know, what exactly are we
talking about?
What exactly is this topic about before people start start trying to discredit it because they don't
actually understand really what it's even saying?
Absolutely, that is the purpose of today is to simply explain what it is and comment on why out and
comment on why a number of very popular criticisms are simply irrelevant.
And, and that's really been been the issue with this topic is that I think a lot of people are
simply hearing the words or hearing the discussions and they think they understand enough of it to
pass comment on.
And actually, actually, because of the kind of diffuse nature of the Internet where people hear
something and then somebody else hears something and repeated it and it's just nonsense.
And I think that's, that's what we're doing today is not, is not.
So if, if, if you already know, if you're listening to this and you already know how new mechanical
matching works and you already have a, you know, full understanding of the of, of the basics, this
isn't going to be, you know, the best podcast for you.
But if you've never come across new mechanical matching before, or if you think you don't have a
full understanding of it, hopefully this will absolutely, you know, deal with that particular issue
and give you everything that you need to know.
That's, that's the plan anyway.
So starting at the beginning, what is the principle of neuro mechanical matching?
Well, the principle of neuro mechanical matching is a hypothesis that has been developed by a group
of neuroscientists after a period of 15 or so years of work in their laboratory.
So it's got nothing to do with me.
All I've done is simply bring it to people's attention.
So there are some people running around with the idea that I had something to do with this
hypothesis.
It's nothing to do with me.
I am simply popularizing it and introducing it.
So point #1 it actually has an incredibly long heritage.
It goes back to the 1970s and 90s.
It was originally called functional differentiation, and that was when people first started to
notice that there was a connection between the activation of a muscle in our movement and the
leverage that that muscle has.
I'll get on to explaining that in a moment in more detail.
And gradually over the years, that functional differentiation concept, you know, grew and grew and
grew and people noticed more and more and more in that line of thinking.
And it was renamed I think around about 2000 and seven, 2009 as the principle of new mechanic
matching.
When this research group headed by Simon Gandivia, incredibly famous, well known neuroscientist,
started to do their own work on it.
They renamed it as the principle of neurocan combating to distinguish the precise work that they
were doing in that area.
And I think they've done or they and related laboratories have done around about 10 or 12 studies on
this.
So again, if you're coming across people who say, oh, there's only one study in neuro mechanical
matching and it's in, I don't know, dogs, then no, that's not true.
There are a series of 10 to 12 studies done by this.
This is this is ignoring the functional differentiation stuff, the moment this is just the new stuff
on the named hypothesis of principle of new mechanical matching, they've got about 10 or 12.
And yes, the early stuff was done in dog respiratory muscles, they went on and they have done stuff
in human skeletal muscle as well, including finger muscles, brunk muscles and even another
laboratory, not theirs has done work in the deltoid, human deltoid muscles.
So even stuff that you will see in strength training has been looked at by this kind of sort of
series of studies.
So and everything that I'm saying you can validate for yourself.
I've got a blog post that I will share on social media which lists out and links all of these
studies.
And you can literally validate everything that I'm saying.
Whereas, you know, other people will be saying there's only one study and it's in dogs.
You can easily demonstrate that that is not true by simply looking at the material that is already
available on the Internet.
OK, so that's the preamble.
Let me now explain exactly what new mechanical matching and why it is important that it solves the
problem that it solves.
So the problem that we have in any human movement or any animal movement, if you like, is that we
don't have a guiding principle or didn't have a guiding principle for how the central nervous system
decides which muscle to switch on.
That sounds absolutely crazy when you think about it.
It's like what, you know, how does the central nervous system decide to use my?
Calf muscles to get out of a chair instead of my hand muscles.
And you're like, now that's obvious.
I mean, obviously it sends the activation because that's the muscle that does that job.
OK, just pull on that thread a little bit and you'll find neurochemical matching at the end of it.
Because what the principle neurochemical matching does is it says that the central nervous system
picks the muscles that have the ability to do the movement rather than muscles that don't, you know,
Well, of course it does.
OK, but keep pulling on that thread.
What happens if you've got a couple of muscles at a joint and they can all kind of do the movement,
but some of them are a bit better at it than others?
Well, the CNS will pick the ones that are a bit better at it, or at least it will prefer to, or do
those first.
And that's essentially all that neuro mechanical matching principle is saying.
It says that if you go to a given joint for a movement that you're interested in or that you're
measuring and you look at which muscles or muscle regions have the best mechanical advantage, which
is the leverage.
So you calculate mechanical advantage by simply saying, if I produce this force with this muscle,
what's the torque that I get out the other end?
Because torque is the muscle force multiplied by the moment on the leverage.
So you can go, OK, well if I'm looking at this joint and I've got this leverage for this muscle and
this leverage for that muscle, and which leverage is longest?
So look at leverages and you go, these muscles have the best leverages.
They're going to be the ones that the brain prefers to use rather than the others.
So the problem that neuron chemical matching is solving is telling us.
Literally all it's telling us is that the brain or the central nervous system chooses whichever
muscles have the best leverage, because that will give you the largest talks for the smallest amount
of muscle force.
So is there an alternative to neuromechanical matching that's been proposed to answer that question
of that problem?
So there have been a number of attempts to provide alternatives to the neuro mechanical matching
principle, but they are very fringe.
This is the interesting thing because when I go to the research literature, you could describe this
as the neuroscience part of exercise science if you like.
When I go to that literature, I only really see the principle of neuro mechanical matching and its
predecessor functional differentiation.
I only really see that I don't see any other major hypotheses being tested or addressed.
So people often in the hypertrophy part of the exercise science community, they will say to me,
neuro mechanical matching is a weird idea that nobody believes in that.
I'm sorry, what if you go to the part of the the exo science community that actually measures and
looks at this kind of question, motor control and motor learning and how does how does the central
nervous system control movement?
It's the only one they talk about really.
I mean, yeah, sure.
There's always going to be review papers where somebody says, well, maybe this could be a
possibility and that could be a possibility.
There's fringe hypothesis.
And I'm not using fringe in a bad word.
I'm just saying that like non mainstream in that community, how they do exist, but nobody's actually
going and exploring them, measuring them, testing them, addressing them.
If you want to actually see the only only available model of how the brain determines where it's and
activation in the human movement, it's the principle of your mechanical matching, previously known
as functional differentiation.
So I wonder how, and look, I know this is not the topic of today, but I wonder how much of this
controversy is because this is an adjacent field as opposed to exercise science.
And if this is kind of, you know, quote, UN quote, new to the exercise science field, and maybe
that's why there's so much pushback on it.
I think that's totally true.
I think very simply what's happened is that I have popularized the discussion of this hypothesis,
and people have turned around and realized that they didn't have that knowledge or they hadn't done
that reading, and they've kind of rejected it out of hand because it didn't sit or it didn't feel
like it was part of their existing education.
Well, it should have been, because it's the only way you can explain how the brain selects which
muscle to use in an exercise.
So it's critical exercise information, really.
It seems very relevant, doesn't it?
It does.
And like, it's not my fault that they didn't have it in their curriculum.
It's not my fault.
I'm just pointing out.
But of course, I'm the person that's easiest to blame because I'm the one that's presenting them
with the inconvenient information.
But ultimately the situation we have is that within the field of people who study this thing,
neuroscientists, this is the prevailing model that they use.
There isn't really any discussion about that.
So when hypertrophy researchers tell me that it's fringe or it's weird, they're just telling me that
they haven't done the reading.
They're just telling me that they haven't read that stuff and they didn't have a model and they
don't like the fact that I'm pointing that out.
So it's it's an ego thing really.
It's like a ego protection thing.
But anyway, the next thing I'd like to address is what the principle of neuro mechanical matching is
trying to achieve.
Now I explain what it does.
It gives you the answer to which muscle is going to get activated or which muscle region is going to
get activated in exercise.
But what is its purpose?
This is this is what I think people miss because there is this assumption in the hypertrophy and the
strength training community that the purpose of a, of a tool that gets you the answer to which
muscle is activated in exercise is to maximize joint torque.
And that's not what the principle of neurochemical matching is clearly trying to do.
The principle of neurochemical matching shows us that it's driving purpose is to maximize
efficiency, not to maximize joint talk.
And I think this above all other issues that I've been looking at in the last week or so, is where
people are talking past each other.
Because every time somebody who understands neuro mechanical matching is talking with somebody who
doesn't understand neuro mechanical matching, they have this kind of conflict because the person who
doesn't understand it thinks, I think as their basic assumption that we're always trying to maximize
joint talk.
The person who actually does understand it is aware that we're not trying to maximize joint torque,
We're trying to maximize the torque to muscle force ratio.
What I want to do is get the maximum amount of torque for the minimum amount of muscle force input.
And that is telling me that I'm always going to be looking for the leverage as my primary function
because that's the easiest way to get more torque for less muscle force.
Now, I'm just going to throw a very, very small point out, I'm not going to go into detail on this,
but you would expect therefore, that passive tension would do the same thing.
You would expect that passive tension would actually give you a benefit by giving you more talk for
less muscle force or at least active muscle force input.
And it doesn't, it doesn't work like that.
Passive force doesn't seem to give you that benefit.
So at some point that problem needs to be resolved.
We need to understand why that's happening.
And that's a complex part of new mechanical matching.
But ultimately, it does simplify the process for us when we're talking about it in practical terms,
because we can say we don't have to think about passive tension.
We can just look at leverages because that is what new mechanical matching trying to do is trying to
give you the biggest talk for the minimum amount of muscle force.
Now that is an important point.
Now, presumably in my mind, that kind of just makes sense, because if you just think about from an
evolutionary standpoint, why would an Organism actually care about being inefficient to maximize an
action?
Surely the goal would be to preserve energy, right?
Is that kind of the idea behind why efficiency matters so much?
So it looks like there might be a number of possibilities driving this and I think you're probably
right.
I think it all comes back to the energy conservation stuff.
The reason I say there's a number of sort of aspects to it is because obviously if we start with the
process of, you know, how the brain is controlling a movement, when we produce motor unit
recruitment, we produce a perception of effort and effort is a disagreeable sensation.
I mean like that's fairly kind of a universally accepted concept.
We don't like putting effort into stuff.
If we can get away with it, we'll put less effort in hopefully at the same result.
So you can see straight away that the CNS has an incentive to minimize effort perception, and it'll
do that by maximizing, you know, the OR choosing the muscles that have better leverage.
But equally, you know, from an energy perspective, your muscle force is what determines your energy
input, your ATP usage.
If you can use a muscle with better leverage, you'll use less energy to get the same torque out.
So ultimately, you can kind of see a number of routes that you can get to the same answer.
But I think you're probably right, which is that the underlying kind of governing factor that that
makes all of this happen is just that we use fewer resources, less effort, less energy, less
activation in order to get the output that we desire.
So I think it's a evolutionarily driven process which is trying to give us the maximum output for
the minimum input, whatever that input might be.
To my uneducated mind, it seems odd to me that someone would think the opposite would be true, that
then an Organism.
Would evolve is that people are coming a tip from a teleological point of view so they're trying to
go well I want to maximize exactly talk because I want to be strong.
I want to lift this way.
Yeah, I want the outcome.
Yeah, but you're not you're kind of evolutionary history.
You know your Organism was not designed for you know that purpose, your organisms don't survive, and
efficiency is one of the best ways of surviving.
So ultimately, the new mechanical matching concept is based on observations that leverages are
closely linked to activations in exercises and movements.
But the underpinning philosophy of it is clearly that it is trying to maximize efficiency, because
if it wasn't then it wouldn't work the way it does.
Just so we haven't lost anyone.
I know this is teaching, telling people how to suck eggs a little bit, but you've used the terms,
you've used maximum force, maximum torque, and you've talked about torque efficiency really briefly.
Can you just describe how those differ?
So what we're saying then is that at any joint you have a couple of muscles that can do the joint
action.
And if you look at them, you can obviously see that they're producing forces.
And muscle force is the linear pulling force on the tendon.
So it's a, it's a linear construct.
If you then look at the joint, you can see the joint rotates.
So you've got a difference between the muscles pulling linearly and the joint is rotating.
When we look at rotating forces, which we call torques or moments, then the torque is generated or
calculated.
Sorry, by the product, the multiplication of the muscle force and the leverage the lever arm that
that muscle has on the joint.
So essentially what we're saying is that the torque is a rotational force and therefore it requires
2 components.
It requires the force and also the lever.
So you've got the force that turns into a torque by the multiplication of that force by the lever
arm distance.
And that's really where we kind of sort of talk about different lever arms because you get different
torques for different kind of muscles depending on how long their levers are.
When I talk about the efficiency of a torque, what I'm saying is essentially how long is the lever?
Do I get a really large torque output for this muscle?
In other words, does it have a really long lever?
So I'm saying the same thing.
I'm just trying to emphasize the fact that that lever doesn't cost me anything energetically.
So I don't need to do anything to get that lever.
It's just there, whereas muscle force is constantly requiring effort to produce motino recruitment.
So I feel a perception of effort.
I'm required to put energy in to make that muscle force happen.
The lever is not like that.
It's free.
It's free torque.
And if I've got a longer lever, I get more torque for the same muscle force.
So if if one was sitting in a car and they had the car door wide open, you're sitting in the in the
driver's seat, the car door is wide open and you try to pull the door shut by putting by pulling up
right up against the door hinge.
You'll find that you have to put quite a lot of effort in and a lot of force to make that happen.
In contrast, if you grab the end of the door where the handle is and pull it towards you, it's very
easy because you've got that huge lever arm that you're now using to make the movement happen.
And that's, that's all levers are.
You can do it.
You can talk about it with, you know what we would call spanners in the UK?
The Americans call wrenches.
I don't know what you call them in Australia, but you can talk about it with those, you know, it's
like holding the spanner or the wrench close to the nut or it's holding it further away.
You know, I mean, there's, there's a number of different illustrations, but fundamentally you've got
to get your head around how there is a difference between linear force and the rotational force,
which is a torque.
That's that's the critical step to really being able to appreciate what we're describing here in
terms of new mechanical.
So with that background and we've explained then what the principle in mechanical matching is doing.
We've explained why it's doing that for the purpose of efficiency.
I've explained why people are misunderstanding the basics of it because they think that the purpose
of this central nervous system control model is to maximise torque outputs or system force outputs
and it's not, it's to maximise efficiency.
What I'd like to do now is move on to a series of popular criticisms and I've arranged them in order
that hopefully will flow.
We'll see what happens, but I just want to kind of work through these and and explain why, you know,
ultimately the, the criticisms are not really criticisms, they're just simply manifestations of
ignorance by the people who are asking them.
Now that's not a problem as long as you, you know, self correct starting at the beginning.
I've kind of already explained this one, but I just want to reiterate the principle of neural
mechanical matching is not a new idea and it's not mine.
So let me just kind of really hammer this one out because I'm getting a little bit annoyed by the
number of people who say it's a brand new idea.
There's only a little bit to research and you know, it's all Chris's thing anyway.
It's like nothing to do with me.
I've simply it's been around as the under the heading of functional differentiation since the 19
late 1970s.
And it was, you know, kind of formalized as the new principle of new organic matching in late 2017,
two 1008, something like that.
And we kind of finally got a review paper to describe all the literature in around about 2019.
And there's, as I say, about 10-12 papers, all of them looking at this concept and it does cover
human skeletal muscles.
So if I read one more comment saying that neuro mechanical matching has only been measured in, you
know, dogs in, you know, kind of non skeletal muscles, then I will actually probably pop because
it's absolutely just simply not true.
And anybody saying that is is ignorant of the available literature.
You can literally check that for yourself.
You don't need to take my word for it.
So I just want to kind of get the really easy stuff out that I need to start with and kind of move
on to something that's a little bit more complicated.
So the first thing I want to talk about that's a little bit more complicated is whether or not or
how rather the principle of new mechanical matching is interacting with the size principle.
So this is the first point I'm actually going to say that people who maybe have genuinely understood
the principle of new mechanical matching, they might have a query or a question or a doubt regarding
how these two principles interact with each other.
This is actually a lot simpler than it looks at first glance.
And to be fair, even the researchers that have worked on the principle neurochemical matching have
got themselves tangled in this, not in a bad way, but like in the sense that they've wrestled with
this kind of issue.
Very simply, you can just say, well, the element size principle sits inside of the principle
neurochemical matching.
So sometimes people will go, you don't need the principle in your can reaction because the size
principle does that for you.
Now just to kind of reduce that statement to the absolute most absurd possibility.
If the size principle is the only thing you've got, then every time you try to do any movement, your
brain would immediately send the activation to the smallest muscle, fibrin or smallest Motrin in
your body, no matter where it was.
So like you would probably find yourself blinking quite a lot when you tried to walk across the room
because the size principle would send the activation to the smallest motor unit, which is probably,
you know, one of the ocular muscles.
I'm just guessing now, obviously that's not what's happening.
You know, the brain has to make a decision about which part of the body the activation goes to
before it then goes to the process of size principle ordering of the motor units in that area.
So you can just say, well, size principle is a, you know, we do Venn diagrams a lot on this podcast,
but it's basically a Venn diagram.
So you've got a circle inside a circle.
Your, your size principle is just going to take over at the point where the neurochemical matching
principle has decided this is the group of motor units I'm going to work with.
After that, this principle takes over and deals with the issue.
So essentially they're not incompatible.
You can see grey areas where they might kind of bump up against each other, but Physiology is messy.
I haven't said that for a while, but I, I used to say it a lot.
I should say it more.
Physiology is messy.
You don't get perfect clean cut kind of edges between every single thing that you're looking at.
But fundamentally, in this case, it's a lot smaller of a problem than people are making out.
You know, size principle just governs once you've got the area of the muscle or the muscle region or
the muscle that you're activating.
Size principle deals with everything after that.
Neurochemical matching is telling you where to go in the 1st place.
Does that all make sense?
I hope so.
That is fairly straightforward.
Hopefully, hopefully that made sense to everyone.
It's, it's literally just locating you, isn't it?
Like neuro mechanical matching is locating you.
And then like you said, the size principle is, in case anyone's not aware of what we mean by size
principle, it's basically just Modi and it's being recruited in smaller 1st and then larger later
basically.
Exactly, exactly.
And we're just dropping that as a subcategory of processes.
Once new mechanical matching is decided, the areas that are going to get are going to get used.
So another criticism which is an interesting 1 is that, and this is a very interesting criticism for
a number of reasons.
It's interesting because it actually tells you a lot about the critic and the way that they think,
as well as just being an interesting question in and of itself.
So the criticism that I've seen is that the central nervous system has no way of detecting leverage.
Now the reason I say that that tells you a little bit about the critic is because we can immediately
disprove it by referring to Marcouri's psycho biological model of fatigue.
So it it kind of tells you that the person who's looking at this problem doesn't actually have that
bit of the puzzle available to them in their current model of how strength training works.
But Marcora's psycho biological model of T tells you that every time you produce a MOTI recruitment
signal, you automatically produce a perception of effort.
Another really well documented, you know, kind of element of Physiology.
Marcora's done amazing work on that really, really cool kind of model for understanding how the
brain, you know, interacts or connects motive equipment with perceptions of effort.
And ultimately this describes how muscular failure is.
Read.
Another thing that I expect the hyperture researchers will go crazy at me about in six months time
when they finally realized that, you know, that's explaining that particular part of their, you
know, sort of, I don't know, workload or whatever it is that you could call it.
But anyway, so Marcora's psycho biological model of fatigue says that you experience through the
sensation of innovation a, a kind of protection of effort every time you produce motor unit
criminal.
OK, so let's imagine that you've got a movement you're doing and you've got 2 possible ways of doing
it.
You've got 2 muscles that are working and they're both kind of discreet single muscles with no
regions.
So basically the principal name connection principle of neural mechanical match, you can choose one
or the other or it can equally divide activation between the two.
Now let's say one of those muscles has really great leverage and the other one doesn't have very,
very good leverage at the joint angle that you're interested in testing.
Now what's going to happen basically is that if you use the muscle with bad leverage in that
movement, you'll have to produce a lot more muscle force, which means that you'll produce a lot
higher motuna equipment level, which means that you'll feel a lot higher perception of effort.
Now incidentally, you'll also churn through a hell of a lot more ATP.
So this is what I was saying earlier about these things being connected.
Now in contrast, if you use the muscle that has much better leverage, then you'll produce a lot
smaller muscle force, You'll experience a lot less effort perception because of the lower level of
recruitment and you'll lose use a lot less ATP.
So essentially what we're seeing here is that the CNS clearly does have the ability to distinguish
between muscles that have different leverages.
It can instantaneously perceive differences in in leverage because it can instantaneously.
Perceived differences in motor unit recruitment for the same output.
So if you're doing a particular movement that requires a certain output, your brain will know
instantaneously whether what it's doing is maximizing the ratio of torque to muscle force because
it'll know whether the effort perception is feasible to come down on.
And that's ultimately, I think one of the most interesting things about the principle of
neurochemical matching is because you can actually instantly see how the brain could be constantly
able to in anything you're doing.
You do one movement, movement, and obviously again, Physiology is messy movements.
Very little changes occur every time you do a movement and the brain will notice.
If the last time you did it was more effortful than the current time, and you can get a, then you
can get an iterative process moving forwards towards a movement that is less effortful for the same
output that you're doing.
So I think this is really interesting because on the one hand it tells you the critics haven't read
that literature or not understood it and how it connects with this.
But on the other hand, it presents a really nice opportunity to show just how easy it is for neuro
mechanical matching to work, because you can connect the leverage of a muscle with the perception of
effort and therefore with the desirability of the movement pattern that you're using.
Again, this is, I feel like hopefully fairly straightforward for people to keep up with.
All you're saying is can the CNS detect effort?
Like obviously, obviously it can.
So, you know, I think where this gets tricky is that there's words that are being applied that
aren't normally being used, right?
Like we're talking about, you know, leverages, for example.
And once someone sees a word maybe come up that is not part of the normal vernacular, then suddenly
they're like, well, that sounds complicated.
That sounds like a genuine criticism argument.
But it's like, well, no, All we're saying is can the CNS detect effort or changes in effort?
Exactly.
Which it obviously can because you can.
So this is like, you know, not really very complicated.
Interestingly, there's also some data that suggests we've got the ability to store information about
the relative leverages that muscles have in the spinal cord.
So there's been one, at least one study done where they electrically stimulated the brachyradialis
muscle while the biceps muscle were doing sort of movements.
And what you get is you get suppression of the bias that's brachy in that scenario.
And it differs depending on whether you're in a pronated or a supinated position.
So you can see that the central nervous system at the spinal level is capable.
Now, whether that's because it's been wired that way by the brain over a number of years or whether
there's something else going on, there's a separate question.
But you know, again, there's there's complexities here that I don't really want to get bogged down
in today because the purpose is more kind of addressing some of these more simplistic.
So the next thing I'd like to move on to is this idea of neural mechanical matching and not applying
or not being tested in high effort situations.
So let me just walk through this, first of all, addressing the criticism directly, and then
secondly, explaining why it fundamentally doesn't really fit with how we understand Physiology to
work.
So firstly, we do have a direct, and when I say direct, I mean people who actually want to study new
mechanical matching.
So The thing is, you can find what I call indirect studies across the entirety of exercise science,
which are studies that weren't originally designed to measure new mechanical matching, but they have
actually done so by, you know, kind of not mistake, but just by virtue of the data that we've
recorded direct studies, one where people actually sat down and go, do muscle activations match with
leverages?
In other words, if I look at the movement or the isometric contraction, do the muscles that or
regions of muscles that have best leverage get more activated than the muscles or regions of muscles
that don't have best leverage?
Now there is a study that has measured 75% of maximum force, which is kind of strength training
territory.
Maybe, I don't know, 12 Rep Max or so, maybe 15 depends on the movement.
But you're, you're in strength training territory with that.
And it's one of the best validations of neurochemical matching in human skeletal muscle.
It's done in the deltoids and it used 75% maximum force.
So if you're going to say that high effort hasn't been tested, well, that's not true.
If you want to say maximum effort hasn't been tested in a direct neuro mechanical writing study,
that's true.
They haven't measured maximum effort, but they have measured pretty high efforts.
In contrast, if you want to go to the indirect studies, whereas people have in people have
inadvertently is not the right word I was going for because obviously you don't inadvertently take
measurements, but they've inadvertently given, you know, kind of evidence for new mechanical
matching.
It's basically where people have measured voluntary activation or muscle activation in particular
joint positions and somebody else has got leverages and they've been able to kind of just put them
over the top of each other.
Now there's a whole ton of maximum voluntary isometric contractions where people have tested things
like glutes, hamstrings, there's there's a number of other muscles, biceps, elbow flexors and you
can literally map the leverage on top of the activation.
You'll see that the leverage where the leverage is high, for example, in the epic sensors where the
glutes have best leverage is in the contract position.
They are by far and away more strongly activated in that contract position.
Now some people will point at one or two studies where the activation is slightly higher in a
slightly flexed position.
Those studies are in a massive minority.
Please don't cite those at me because you know the vast majority of studies show that glute Max
activation is maximal in an extended hip or even hyperextended hip position.
And the leverage of the glute is by far and away greatest of that point as well.
The second of the hamstrings, they have greatest average of 45° and they have greatest activation of
that position as well.
So there's a number of cases where in what I would call indirect study kind of evidence, calves are
another great 1.
So, you know, soleus in the contract position, gastroc in the stretch position, again, where they
have best leverages, you can kind of just kind of keep going with these.
So I would say that maximum effort has been inadvertently tested because we do have the data to show
that it does actually work.
Just nobody's done a, a single study to show that would happen.
Now that's addressing the criticism of face value, which is people saying, you know, neural
mechanical matching hasn't been tested or actually they tend to be a little bit sneaky and they go,
we don't think it applies in maximum effort situations.
Now, the reason they don't think it applies is because they don't actually understand what's
happening in a maximum effort situation.
I'll explain why.
So if you ask them what they think is happening in a maximum effort situation, they will say that
the body is activating everything that it can to maximize the system force output.
Well, that's fundamentally untrue and you can instantaneously prove it's untrue.
So I like these situations because people come at me with these arguments that they think are
completely watertight and I can see absolutely massive holes in them because, you know, if you do
the reading, you know how Physiology works, then you can, you know, sort of piece these things
together.
The reason that there's a massive hole in this is because the brain doesn't use everything that it
can in a maximal effort, and that's easy to prove by just looking at the bilateral force deficit.
You can literally go to bilateral force deficit and you can see that if the brain is using 2 arms at
the same time, you've got a lower level of motion recruitment than you do if you're using one arm at
a time instantaneously.
Showing you that you've got what's called a voluntary activation deficit in that two arm variation
compared to the single arm variation.
And in fact, voluntary activation deficits exist in every single strength training movement that we
do.
And the more muscle mass you have involved, the bigger that deficit is.
You go down to exercises involving the quads of glutes and who knows what else.
You're going to see 20% deficit.
So you're going to see a big chunk of motion.
It's not being used.
The reality is the brain is still going to try and maximize efficiency in that scenario because
that's the way it actually, it actually will get you to the maximum torque in that scenario in most
cases.
Now I'll come on to an exception moment which we can talk about in a bit more detail, but I'll
explain why that's not a problem as well.
But fundamentally, because the brain actually has a deficit to voluntary activation, you are still
going to want to use the muscles and regions that have best leverage.
You are not going to activate absolutely everything because you can't, you know, because ultimately
the maximum amount of motor neutruement that you can generate across all the muscles that you're
using is determined by your maximum tolerable perception of effort.
Again, Marcora, so we've got this scenario where we're limited by the effort perception.
We're going to try and piece together whatever muscles have the best leverage because it actually
got the best chance of getting us to maximum torque as well as being the most efficient thing that
we're trying to do.
So it doesn't need to change its protocol from efficiency in a maximum effort scenario because it's
most likely going to be the way that gets you to maximum torque anyway.
Does that make sense?
Does it does?
Why?
Why did we evolve in a way that we are limited by effort or by central motor command?
Like why can't we access all motor units?
So the question that you're asking me is to explain how fatigue works.
So which is a big topic.
Basically the purpose of all fatigue mechanisms and supraspinal central nervous system fatigue is
what the Markora psychobiological model of fatigue tells you.
You know how it works.
All fatigue mechanisms are designed to place limiters on how much energy we can burn through.
I mean that's fundamentally what fatigue mechanism is doing.
If you look at for example, you know, metabolite related fatigue at the muscle fibre level is trying
to slow down the rate of cross bridge binding and that's trying to slow down the rate of ATP usage.
That's what it's doing.
It's efficiency machines.
Well, it's slightly more than efficiency, it's a protection mechanism.
So what it's doing is it's trying to slow you down in the usage of your energy because if you were
to burn through all of the available ATP, your muscle fibers would die, which is an extremely
undesirable outcome if you're being chased by a Saber toothed tiger because you'll just be lying
there on your back, you know, as it munches away at you.
Ultimately, we don't want that scenario.
We want at least to be able to, you know, kind of balance this need for, you know, running away very
quickly at the same time not catastrophically blowing up and ending up with no muscle fibers that
are capable of doing a movement.
So it's that very, very kind of interesting.
But fundamentally, the way fatigue mechanisms work is as protective that kind of sort of
interventions in the movement that we're doing.
It's trying to slow us down.
It's trying to stop us from using energy too quickly.
And ultimately, neural mechanical matching is doing something very, very similar.
It's trying to maximize the energy we do have for the output that we want to achieve.
Again, all of this is basic kind of, you know, geared towards survival, which is what you would
expect.
You made a point a couple of points ago about the indirect data.
Now that's something I just want to highlight as well, because a lot of the time people who enter
into these discussions, not just on neuro mechanical matching, but on anything muscle Physiology,
the argument typically that I see online will be talking about whatever the topic is.
And then the person arguing will say, well, what's the study that shows that?
And what a lot of people don't realize when it comes to Physiology and, and some of these topics is
like what you said there with the indirect data is you actually have one study that shows step one
and then you have another study that shows Step 2.
And a lot of the time they do piece together very well.
And then you have other studies that have shown step one and other studies that have shown Step 2.
And so it's often not as simple as here is one study that has done step one and Step 2.
It's usually, often it's separate studies.
I just want to highlight that because I see people not understand that and think, well, no,
obviously every single topic has to have been summarized in a singular study.
And unfortunately, that's just not the way this stuff works.
Absolutely.
No.
That's, that's important to recognize.
And I would add to that and say ultimately the easiest way to organize the material that you're
working with and understand a lot about strength training is to find key physiological concepts that
have been well tested and hold up under scrutiny now.
Because the hypoetry researchers and the popular fitness influencers that have science based, you
know, stuck to their names have persuaded a big chunk of the fitness industry that new mechanical
matching is a fad.
It's a new thing.
It's not, that doesn't change the fact that it's not that thing.
It is actually a very well established fundamental scientific principle that's been developed over a
number of years, if not decades by some incredibly good researchers.
You know, and just because some fitness influencers didn't recognise it and so lost their, you know,
kind of marbles when they saw it presented the first time and got really upset about it.
But that's, that's irrelevant.
You know, the fact is it is a well established principle, as is Marcora's psychobiological model of
fatigue and a bunch of other stuff.
And if you start with those big rocks, you can actually from that point make some very clear
assumptions that are not actually that shaky.
So the difference between what I'm doing and what a lot of other people are doing is that I'm
starting with fundamental Physiology that's not really contentious to the people who understand it.
A lot of other people are kind of going, well, you know what about this idea?
And I'm like, you've just pulled out of your hat and nobody takes that seriously in the area of
research that deals with that thing, but you think it's relevant because, you know, you don't
actually understand that there's a gigantic iceberg of information over here that you haven't taken
into consideration.
So we've got to start with, I think we start with these big principles.
And yes, you know, the single studies are not going to give people the answers that they seek.
Doing the proper reading and understanding the shape of exercise science and where these big
principles are and starting with those, I think will help them a lot and perhaps lead them to
situations where they don't find themselves asking for single study.
You know, kind of references for things that don't need single study references.
So I've saved one of the most interesting and complex criticisms to last because I was hoping that
if people dropped out by this point, it wouldn't matter because I find this one fascinating.
I actually really love talking about this and people think that it's slam dunk and it's absolutely
not.
So there's a single study floating around which used a musculoskeletal model, which they built using
assumptions.
And some of those assumptions are, I'm not being rude, but they're shaky because the data isn't
good.
So it's not their fault, it's just that the data isn't good.
So they've got data they're trying to, you know, kind of use to make a model.
And the data that they're using for like, for example, you know, glute, the cycle Melanx is not, is
not good.
So it's it's it's a difficult and muscular to model to defend if you know what you're looking at.
And this model basically says that or showed that the biggest contribution of a loot to hip
extension torque is not at 0, it's at 45°.
And essentially this is this kind of this study is kind of being waved around as like, oh, this
proves new mechanical matching is not working or that new mechanical matching has to take the length
tension relationship into account when it's, you know, doing its thing in addition to leverages or,
you know, instead of leverages.
So I'm going to start just by setting the context.
Neurochemical matching has, as I say, 1012 studies, really well established pedigree of validation
in a number of different contexts, a number of different muscles.
And it shows that leverage is the thing that determines where the brain sends activation.
So straight away, please don't wave a single musculoskeletal model at me with dodgy assumptions and
expect me to take it seriously when I've got this enormous body of data over here with a very
established principle.
Secondly, the idea that the brain would choose to use the length tension relationship in its
calculations of which muscle to activate at which joint angle is impossible, and it's impossible
because of the way sarcamerogenesis works.
So again, what we're doing now is we're saying, let's go and look at the sarcamerogenesis literature
and see whether this idea that the brain uses the length tension relationship to determine the
muscle to activate a particular joint angle can't possibly be true.
So this is what I always do.
I look at the neighboring areas of literature that are very well established and I go, does this
actually make sense in the context of the claim that's being made?
Now, sarcamogenesis literature tells you that if you activate muscle fibers repeatedly in stretched
positions, they add sarcamers, right?
That's not contentious.
If you activate muscle fibers repeatedly at short lengths, they start removing sarcamers.
OK, so we've got these two observations which are absolutely easy to validate.
You can go and check this.
I mean, I've got like FAQs on this, but this is not controversial stuff really.
I mean, I'm sure you can find somebody out there who will disagree with it, but that's the Internet
for you.
Now, if you now think about this right, if the brain used the length tension relationship to
determine which muscle length to activate a muscle at, it would never be able to create
sarcomereogenesis and it would never be able to create loss of sarcomeres because it would only ever
activate muscle fibres on the plateau of the length tension relationship.
So you'd never get sarcomereogenesis and you'd never get loss of sarcomeres.
It would just never happen because she'd always be activating exactly on the plateau.
And that's not what we see.
We regularly see sarcomeogenesis happening or the opposite, we get loss of sarcomeres.
And that's because what the brain is doing is activating a muscle according to leverage.
And that isn't going to correlate perfectly with the length tension relationship.
Now what then happens is that your length tension relationship will move and it'll move actually
ironically to exactly the place where the muscle has best left pitch because that's the place where
you're at the muscle length that you're repeatedly activating those muscle fibers at.
So you end up with the migration of your length tension plateau towards the place where the muscle
has the best, which is incidentally why immediately when I saw the study showing that the glue
wasn't activated or didn't have a length tension relationship which is maximized at zero, it was
maximized 45.
Immediately.
It could possibly be true because if you look at the way that muscles work, they will move their
length tension relationships to the point where the muscle has the best leverage.
You can see this in the brachioradialis.
It's the only elbow flexor which has a different length tension relationship from the others.
All the others have an ascending limb followed by a plateau.
The brachioradialis which is activated at short lengths, has a plateau followed by a descending limb
because it doesn't get activated normally in the stretch position, so it doesn't create
sarcomogenesis, so it doesn't move it's plateau.
All the others move their plateaus to the end position because that's where they repeatedly got
activated in, in accordance with their leverage being greatest in the stretch position, relatively
speaking.
Do the same thing with the gastroc.
Same thing with the soleus.
You've got leverage better for the soleus in the short position.
It tends to have a plateau there.
If you look at the gastroc, it has a plateau in the stretch position.
And this is a really, really consistent pattern.
And I think it's very, very interesting to see how the soccer major genesis literature shows us
exactly why neuro mechanical matching is working the way it is.
And you can't possibly take the length tension relationship into account.
So I said I'd come back to this idea that sometimes force might not be maximized, sorry, joint talks
might not be maximized by the neuro mechanical matching principle.
The way it works, the moment, yes, theoretically you can have a situation where for a period of
time, the length tension relationship will give you a bigger total joint torque because it's giving
you more force at a different joint angle from the one where the brain is activating the muscle
according to the leverage.
But what will happen is your LinkedIn relationship will migrate over time to coincide with the place
where the brain is activating the muscle according to leverage, and you'll end up in the place where
you're maximizing torque production as well as maximizing efficiency.
So that's why I said 1020 minutes ago that you actually get to the same place with neurocalic
maximizing torque as well as maximizing efficiency in a maximal F ofology, A contraction.
Eventually you do, because what happens is you repeatedly activate the sarcomeres until you add or
subtract sarcomeres to get the length tension plateau happening at the same place as your leverage
is best.
That's just how Physiology has to work because that's how the muscle fibres were responding.
Being activated at that muscle length.
If you have a scenario where you, you say to me, no, we still think the length tension relationship
determines where the brain activates the, you know, which joint angle the brain is activating the
muscle at.
Then you've got to explain to me how sarcomere dynasis and sarcomere loss work because you can't,
because they can't work the way that we think they do.
If that's what you're, you're arguing, you're essentially creating a in the system that we currently
believe is working.
You're creating a circular reference.
You're creating a circular reference because the brain is using information to decide where to
activate the muscle and it's then changing the muscle length, sorry, the number of soccer moons and
series based on that information.
So it actually can't possibly work.
And I think this is one of those important things that again, if you start with fundamental aspects
of Physiology and you put them in a kind of sort of a row and you go, these are the things I know
are true or I'm very confident are true.
Then when you look at these studies that come out and people go, oh, you've got to throw all of new
mechanical matching out now because this single studies, you know, give me a break.
You know, even even given the fact that it's a single study, even given the fact that the data input
are by necessity a little bit shaky, even given all of that, it still doesn't work because you're
trying to violate fundamental physiological principles.
So save that one till last because it is the most complicated.
I've got AI think I've got a post going out on it tomorrow actually that hopefully sets all of this
out that will help people understand if they want to look at it more detail.
I say tomorrow, but it'll be the probably about the same time when the podcast goes out just because
of the way that that works.
Is that making sense?
I know it's complex.
Does that making sense?
Is that I've been just predicated on that glute study?
Yeah.
Do people make it is.
Yeah.
OK, interesting.
Well, it's, it's the one that is the only piece of evidence that is being provided.
Interestingly, in these discussions, the requirement upon me to provide evidence seems to be very
high and the requirement to people who make things up seems to be very low.
So for example, you've got people going, we don't think neurochemical matching is relevant because
we think line of, you know, kind of direction of muscle fibres is important.
I'm like, do you have a single study?
Do you have one, one study that shows anything that is possible to connect the choice that the brain
is making or the choice that central nervous system is making for which muscle to activate and which
reasonable muscle to activate and the fiber direction crickets.
Nothing because you've got AB, they've got absolutely zero.
There is nothing.
It doesn't exist.
That's I think that's really interesting that people can go, Oh, well, we know.
We don't think it's no, I'm like, what data have you got?
It is crazy.
It really is.
The thing is like this mismatch.
They're like, oh, no, we, we need you to provide 17,000 references for every single point that we've
got.
We've got nothing to justify by our unicorns that we're pretending exist.
I'm like honestly, it is very silly.
Just to come, a quick comment on line of action, line of pull, line of muscle fire direction.
So technically Phoenicians are really messy here because if you look at the literature, you'll see
reference to line of action or line of pull.
Now strictly speaking, line of action, which can also be written as line of pull is part of the way
that we can calculate the the moment arm.
So if you take the joint centre and you've got the line of action and basically your leverage is the
distance between those two things.
I mean, that's just a calculation method that is often used.
Now, if you've got a complex muscle, you're going to need to do that many, many, many, many, many
times to get an idea of what the whole average moment arms of the muscle look like or the lines of
action and the muscle look like.
And that's totally fine.
You can do that.
If you've got enough elastic bands.
You're going to need a couple of 100, but you can do that.
It's valid. 1 is not.
But you know, the more complex muscle, the more elastic bands that you need.
That's not the same thing as fibre direction because fibre direction is literally just looking at
the direction of the fibre's running.
Now people confuse these things and often the influencers will confuse them and they'll go, Oh well,
you know, line of pull is this.
And then they'll show you a picture of muscle fibers running in a certain direction.
Like hang on a minute, you're confusing fibre direction with line of pull of the muscle from
whatever, you know, origin, it's got to whatever insertion.
Now fibre direction is not related to line of action.
It can do different things because of ponation angles and even change during the muscular
contraction.
So it's not the same thing.
So yes, there is a relationship between line of action and line of pull and moment arm, although
again, you need lots of them to make it work and not the same thing as fibre direction, but you can
have situations where fibres running in that direction that you think is very advantageous and it
actually doesn't really make a lot of sense because they don't have a very big moment arm.
And as I say, there's nothing connecting fibre direction to the way that the brain organises
activation during an exercise.
If you've got a fitness inference and they're talking about line of action or line of pull, you're
going to need to just look at the pictures they're using or the descriptions that they're giving and
try and establish what they mean by that.
If they mean the literature definition of line of action, then essentially they're saying the same
thing as me because they're saying moment.
I'm just, it's an indirect.
Is this the other part of the triangle?
Geometrically it's not not any different from what I'm saying really just measuring a different part
of the triangle.
But if they're starting to draw pictures and show you directions of muscle fibre, you know, lines of
directions that they're going in, then that's not the same thing.
And you've got to kind of realise that they've confused those two things and that's that's that's
problematic.
So yeah, technically line of action is going to fit into the same geometrical puzzle that momentum
does.
So they're saying the same thing direction does not.
And you're saying that if you look at fiber orientation or fiber direction, there isn't any evidence
to support that that is in somehow?
It's not even, there's no evidence.
I don't think anybody ever even studied it.
I don't think there's even a study.
I mean, I'd love for somebody to prove me wrong and send me something that's been done I've missed
because I mean, I think that's one of those weird things that when you've read as much as I've read
of the literature, you know, like the, the joy of finding something new over over overwhelms a lot
by quite a lot the the embarrassment of not having read that particular thing.
But like, it'll just be really cool.
And I think that that's definitely the case here that I'd love to see something.
I think that everybody who is, I think everybody who is referencing fibre orientation, that's the
terminology I've been searching for.
Everybody's referencing that is confusing the terminology line of action with that in the
literature.
They think they're referring to 1 when they're referring to the other and that's important
distinction.
Is that all?
OK.
Does that make sense?
It does it, I mean, ultimately listening to it all, you're like, well, there's I guess I, I went
into this podcast expecting there might be some arguments that at least held water and it feels that
most of them are either terminologic term term.
God, what's the word I'm looking for?
Terminological.
Yes, issues or simply not looking outside this scope at all to things like fatigue or just looking
outside that that, you know immediate literature that that person's familiar with and really walking
through it.
It's like, well, hang on, there's, there's not really any challenge to any of this at this point, is
there?
No, I mean, I think, I think I would add one more issue, which is that some people, I don't
understand what numerical matching is trying to do.
They think it's trying to maximize force, not efficiency, and therefore they misunderstand the
philosophical kind of underpinnings of what the purpose of it is.
You know, the evolutionary purpose of it is to maximize efficiency, not to maximize instantaneous,
you know, torque up.
And I think you end up maximizing torque output just because of the way all the other Physiology
aligns.
But it's not what it sets out to do in the first instance.
And I think there's a misunderstanding there.
And I think what that causes people to do is lock on to the length tension relationship and go, oh,
well, I must always be working on the plateau of the length tension relationship.
Well, you are going to end up doing that.
Honestly, you are, but that's not what the brain sets out to do in the first instance.
It just happens as a byproduct of activating the muscle at a particular muscle length.
And again, not understanding stoichiogenesis literature, which seems to be a particular speciality
of hypertrophy researchers to ignore that literature because they obsessed with stretch mediator
hypertrophy not being that then I think again that will for blindness to that literature source I
think has caused them issues here as well.
At the end of the day, there's a series of issues, but you know, I think about where we are in terms
of understanding the model and how it relates to the rest of Physiology is actually pretty strong.
The thing I'd like to kind of mention just at the end, and that's because a couple of my mentorship
clients have messaged me saying please will you address this is a couple of practical points.
And that is how do we how do we use this in practice, you know, and what happens under certain
situations if I've got this data and that data and the other data.
So question number one is if I've got the number of muscles to a particular joint and one of them is
a small muscle, like a great example of this would be the posterior delt in a exercise and it has
amazing leverage for the joint action.
So posterior delt has amazing leverage for sagittal plane pulling.
So shoulder movement in that sagittal plane pulling downwards.
Now people kind of get worked up about well, OK, but I'm training lap there.
Why is what's happening?
What does that mean?
You know, how do I understand this?
Well, basically new mechanical matching will look for the best, most efficient way of producing the
movement.
So it'll start and go, Oh yeah, great, fantastic posterior that has amazing leverage and it'll send
a whole chunk of of activation there.
But obviously small muscle.
You can then carry on and recruit a whole lot of other Moat units in the places.
Actually, there'll be situations where there'll be some Moat units of the lats that have better
leverage than some Moat units of the posterior dose.
So you get a switching over between those two at some point.
But fundamentally, yes, the brain will prioritise the posterior dose to have better leverage.
Now, subsequently to this, people get confused about terminology prime mover and there we go, which
does that mean the posterior delta is a prime mover?
I'm like, stop new mechanical etching is telling you how the brain decides where to allocate, you
know, your activation and exercise.
The terminology prime mover is telling you as a biomechanist what's doing the most work.
Those things are not the same.
So if I've got a really large muscle, and this is going to be very difficult to try and get through
to people, I think if I've got a really large muscle, then yes.
If that muscle has worse leverage like the lat does compared to the posterior delta, the brain will
start preferring the posterior Dr. and then it'll move on to the parts of the lats that it can do in
that situation.
The lat is still the prime mover from a biomechanical point of view, but that doesn't mean the lat
is getting higher activation in the posterior doctor because it's not.
So it's called the prime mover because in terms of its contribution to torque, it's larger because
it just fundamentally is a bigger muscle and biomechanically that you can't get around that.
But from a hypertrophy point of view, that doesn't matter.
That's why I say to people, if you're only interested in hypertrophy, just remove the words prime
movement from your vocabulary.
Well, that's exactly what I said.
They're useless to you.
They are absolutely useless to you.
Why would anyone use that, exactly?
Don't use that, yeah.
They're only useful if you're creating an ask closely to a model and you want to understand for some
purpose what muscle is contributing most to that joint.
Maybe you're in rehab and you want to know for this person to be able to do that movement, how much,
you know, kind of of this muscle.
Do I need an amateur?
Yeah, fine, great.
No problem.
You can use the words prime mover because they're meaningful to you, you know, But if you're looking
at I personally, they are useless to you.
They don't do anything.
And yet people will carry on using them and they'll keep saying, well, the brain looks at it and it
sees it's a big muscle.
Well, and it's no stop.
It doesn't do any of those things.
You're making stuff up, you know, and people say to me, well, the brain prefers the Latin in a lap
pull down or a kind of a row because it's a bigger muscle.
You're talking rubbish.
There's no data that suggests that it does that at all.
You're literally making stuff up.
Now the brain picks stuff based on leverage, what neuron chemical matching shows.
We've got a whole series of studies doing you know just because talking heads on the Internet say
that that's not true doesn't mean that it's not true.
You know I've got the citations I can show you.
So it's like importantly, prime move is not a useful concept yes, the brain is going to pick a
muscles that are best leverage even if they're small.
So if you.
Could get.
So say you've got less use the example, you just go there, you're doing the row and we're talking
about posterior delta, we're talking about lats as well.
If you were to identify all the motor units that are involved that can be involved in that movement
and then let's say you color-coded them to posterior delta until that, what we would see is that the
ones that color-coded posterior delta largely going to be used earlier referentially in that
movement.
And it's almost like a, it's the same principle in essence is like the Heneman size principle.
Like there's, we're just talking about in what order are these mode units being used?
And then what you're going to see is all the posterior Del Moto unit sort of colour coded yellow.
They're going to be used earlier because like you said, they've got better leverage, but they're
going to be used up quicker, more quickly than the ones for lats, which are then going to make up a
large chunk of our, our coloured chart there.
That doesn't mean the lats have better leverage.
It simply means that they're going to be and.
It doesn't mean the lat is is recruited preferentially because it's big.
This is what happens.
You see, people go, I need to find a way to reconcile the fact that this, you know, the lat is more
important to me in this exercise and I need to like, no, it doesn't work like that.
You know, it's literally a very simple single principle.
There's so many mistakes that are being made online based on this exact concept.
So I'm hoping that people are hearing what it is in fact that is being said here.
And I'm just going to ask you a couple more questions around it.
So you've talked about obviously issues with maximal recruitment and you've just talked here about
how the posture it dealt in this exercise has, you know, greatest leverage.
Does that mean that if you were to do an exercise in which the lat was not as involved, is a
posterior delt getting a higher level of recruitment than it is in this exercise?
So in practical terms, what you're saying is we compare a like a rear delt fly with a?
Sagittal.
Road Sagittal Rd.
That's a really, really cool question.
I think I think we probably would see at the most granular level, yes that you're getting a little
bit less recruitment in the posterior dealt.
And the reason for that though is because, and this is going to lead on to the next topic that we
mentioned in this section is that I think there will be parts of the posterior dealt that don't have
better leverage than big chance for that.
Yeah.
I wondered.
And that's that's really where it what it comes down to.
So on that colour code thing that I've talked about, yeah, I think some of the yellow.
Sprinkled higher up, but that's, that's Physiology being messy again.
Yeah, you know, so, but the fact that you're using an an exercise that fundamentally has a capacity
to achieve a high level of motive increment in the working muscles that you're using, I think you'd
probably get more in the real.
I don't think it'd be a lot more, but I think you probably would get at the very tiniest granular
level you would get.
Yeah, yeah.
And just to reiterate a point which I think you've made anyway, but again, I think it's
misunderstood.
We're not saying that therefore in the sagittal row, once the posterior delt is, is, I don't want to
use the term maxed out.
But ultimately that's kind of what I'm saying here.
It doesn't mean that you then can't move on to recruiting more of the lats, right, Because people
seem to think you know, the the posterior deltas, the limiting factor here.
It's now Max.
But again, that's confusing terminologies that people are going because I'm now assigning the role
of if I move her to the posterior deltoid, I'm assigning this role.
You're fundamentally trying to apply your existing framework for how you thought exercise was
controlled into a new framework, which is correct.
Your old one was not correct.
And you're trying to do a Hegelian dialectic and smash the two together.
And you can't do that because that's not what we're talking about, you know, ultimately.
You've tickled me philosophically there.
Well, I, I kind of know that you're an interest, you're interested in that stuff.
So I kind of like to throw it in occasion, but yeah, that's what's happening.
People are trying to smash the two things together and that's just not going to work, you know,
because you're dealing with two totally discrete systems, both of which are trying to explain how,
you know, the brain chooses which muscle to use and exercise and the process it goes through.
And you can't because their separate systems.
So, you know, you've got to just start with new mechanical matching and going, what does new
mechanical matching tell me is going to happen?
And then walk through it.
And you end up with, yeah, most of the posterior delta is going to get activated in preference to
most of the lab.
Sure.
Does that mean the posterior delta is limiting?
Of course it doesn't.
You know you're limited by everything that you've got available until you hit the maximum tolerable
protection of effort.
Now obviously then the extension of that would be to say, well, if you took out the necessary or
the, the the requirement of the posterior delta in that movement, then there's more central motor
command available for the lats.
And so obviously we see people following that train of thoughts thinking, well, if we can isolate or
bias in a muscle region without more muscle that we don't want to train in that exercise being used,
then obviously we can get more recruitment.
So yes, that is also true.
But that's just like going from a going from a pull a like a row or a pull down to a pullover, isn't
it?
I mean, that's the concept.
Yes.
Yeah.
And I don't think we're talking really contentious.
I mean like I think bodybuilders deliberately choose those exercises to focus on those muscle
groups.
I think when people say, Oh no, you're wrong about, you know, kind of single joint exercises
involving high levels of recruitment in the single joint muscle compared to the multi joint, I'm
like, are you, are you living on the same planet as me?
It's like, honestly, I think some people just like to disagree with you for the sake of disagree.
With you now, you said there's another point you wanted to make on.
The second, the second question I've been asked by my mentorship plans to address on this topic is
what happens if you have two muscles which have very similar leverages to each other, but one has a
bigger leverage than the other?
And in another scenario, you have two muscles with very different leverages from one of them.
So what they're asking me is, does the magnitude of difference between the two leverages make a
difference or is it just like binary off and on?
So if a muscle has better leverage than the other muscle, does that mean that Yep, straight away the
muscle with better leverage automatically gets all the activation and the other one doesn't get any?
And conversely, you know, is it a great, a sort of a grey scale, a starting scale?
Well, I've kind of answered that question already in what I said about the posterior dealt in the
lab.
Because if you have two muscles that have on paper like massively different leverages, I mean, a
nice example of this would be like something like the, you know, I don't know, He said it's a nice
example and then he kind of changed his mind halfway through.
No, you can see some pretty big differences between the lower and upper regions of the lat in
sagittal and frontal plane pulling.
You can't like sort of quite substantial.
You can see some pretty differences between the anterior and the middle delta, but obviously in
frontal and sagittal plane pressing.
But you know those kind of big differences and then you can see other smaller differences as well
like maybe between regions and the PEC.
So the question is then does the magnitude of the difference make an impact on how much of one
region gets activated preference together or it does because what you're looking at is the average.
So if you've got 2 muscle regions and they have massively different average leverages, then what
you're saying is that the majority, if you kind of draw a histogram, the majority of your muscle is
going to fall in that category of having that leverage.
And the majority of the other muscle, the other muscle region is going to fall in the category of
having a much worse leverage.
If you have two muscles that have on paper very similar average leverages, 1 is slightly more than
the other, you're going to find that your histogram is overlap, your distributions overlap.
So essentially you've got a distribution of ossifiers that you know, kind of maybe you're going to
see some popping up earlier and some popping up late.
So the question is already answered in the sense that yes, the magnitude, the difference between the
two average leverages will change how much of one muscle gets activated before the other because it
changes how much of one muscle has better leverage than how much of the other muscle.
So This is why when I'm having arguments with people and they're saying all of the LAT is all
activated during a, you know, a frontal plane exercise and all of the latter is activated during a
such plan exercise.
Aside from the fact that that statement is immediately verifiably untrue because the voluntary
activation deficit exists.
You know, it's like if a voluntary activation deficit exists, then you can't make that statement
straight away.
You can't say that all of the lies activated in anything because it's not.
So the fact that voluntary activation exists means straight away you've got that some muscle fibers
are not being activated.
The question is, is it the same muscle fibers not being activated in the frontal plane versus the
South plane?
Well, if you look at the difference in leverages.
Between those regions, you can immediately see that the leverage difference is huge.
So there must be differences in which muscle fibers are being jettisoned.
Essentially what the brain is doing inadvertently is saying which muscle fibers that I've got access
to are the most useless possible muscle virus for this action and couldn't possibly help me.
It might actually pull me in the opposite direction and I'm going to push those to the top end of
the sequence and hopefully never activate them.
You know, that's what it's doing.
And a really nice example of this is the gluteus medius, because you've literally got antagonist
functions in the same muscle group.
You know, it's like you've literally got a part of the muscle that will do external rotation, the
part of the muscle that do external rotation, internal and external.
So anterior audio internal and posterior external, you can't activate those at the same time because
you would literally be producing an antagonist kind of force coupled with its own inside its own
muscle.
So at what layer?
What level is this happening?
Is it happening at a region level?
At a motor unit level.
Obviously at a motor unit level.
So essentially we think in terms of anatomy drawings, don't we?
We like go, oh, you know, that's a muscle.
The brain.
Brain doesn't work like that.
It thinks and there's a motor unit because that's what it's controlling.
It's like you could imagine the brain is like a pianist with, you know, fingers able to go on keys
and each key is a, is a motor.
The unit, you know, it doesn't think in terms of muscles, in terms of cords.
It thinks in terms of, you know, O2 unit.
So the the question you were just answering in terms of averaging the leverage was that was in
reference to if different fibers have different.
No, it's in reference to if you have two muscles or muscle regions and they have massively different
leverages.
But then in another example, you have two muscles and they have very similar leverages, but one is
definitely still bigger than the other.
Does it mean that those two situations produce the same outcome?
Right, like you're just going to use one region 1st and then the other as opposed to overlapping
them?
Because you've provided additional information that helps people understand that, which is that the
brain doesn't see muscle regions, it sees motor units.
Yeah, because you could argue then.
Well, yeah, ultimately we're just looking at it at a motor unit level.
Yeah.
I didn't even realize that that would be an argument or a confusion in that topic.
That's I.
Don't think it's a confusion.
I think it's it's a an attempt for clarity in programming.
Because what it means is that if you're looking for exercises that really do target a particular
muscle or region, you really do want to look for those big leverage differences.
It's not sufficient to say, well, it does have 2mm better leverage and like, well, no, you don't
want to do that.
You want to maximize your opportunity.
So that's why incidentally, when people are looking for a exercise, what you need to target to most
of what you need is a set of training adjustments that you can make.
So I'd run through these in various places, but it's like you don't just want to look at joint
angles.
Some people go, we'll just use different joint.
We'll just train everything into contract and everything into stretch position and therefore I'll
cover all my bases.
Doesn't work like that because sometimes you've got joint rotation effects like we talk about with
the car.
So we talk about with the elbow flexes where you got pronation and supination, and so you can
introduce these other factors that make a difference.
Plane of motion, obviously a massive 1 when you're talking about shoulder stuff, you know, totally
different effects when you're working.
I find it funny actually, all this fuss about the lats not being different between frontal and
sagittal, and it's like nobody thinks that about the delta is it's like, Oh no, no, no, the delta is
a different, you know, OK, sure, OK.
You know, so actually very similar leverages between the delts and between the different regions of
the lats.
But that's beside the point.
So yeah, it's a, it's a very interesting programming point where you have to say, well, OK, how can
I maximize the differences?
I'm not just going to use range of motion to push things towards the back of your radialis.
I'm not just going to train contract position.
I'm going to use pronated grip as well because I'm forcing as much as I can, you know, onto the
scale.
I'm tipping the scale as much as I can to make sure that as much activation goes towards that
muscle.
Yeah, that's a really good point in case people haven't followed that.
So it would be common to say in the case you just gave their bracket radialis compared to Bisis
Draki, it'll be common to say, well if that movement is hardest at the top, then that's naturally
going to be more bracket radialis.
Right, but you can make it even more bracket radialis by using a protein to grip.
Exactly.
So again, if we use our color analogy, you're going to see sure, by making it highest at the top,
there's going to be more of the bracha gradials colored motor units early on.
But there's still going to be some biases, Graki, if you're doing that in a supernated position and
you're saying, well, how let's also do this pronated.
And now we're going to see more of those bracha gradials colored mode.
And it's earlier on.
And this is important because, and I've been guilty of this using terminology of saying, well, we
want to train that region where it has best relative leverage, just slightly best relative leverage.
As you pointed out, it's as best relative leverage as you could.
Possibly make it?
Yeah, absolutely so.
And that's why I've gone through and there's an FAQ on this precise topic.
I've literally gone through and gone.
What adjustments can you make to an exercise that will do that?
And there's four or five of them, you know, and you can go through and you can sort of say, well,
can I, can I do this?
You know, because sometimes a joint won't let you do it.
You know, you can't, you can't do, you know, sort of rotational stuff for certain joints because
there's only one plane of motion it'll work in.
You know, you can't start changing plane in motion.
You can't start, you know, moving positions approximately distal joints because there's nothing to
move.
So you've got to kind of go through the possibilities that are available to you.
And sometimes there's more possibilities available than others, but generally speaking, all of those
things will have an effect.
It's not just about one thing and not just that's why you can't just sell.
We'll just train everything at one end and everything at the other end and, you know, shorten and
lengthen and that that would do it and it won't because you've got other things that work as well.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Because that is all also something that is obviously commonly repeated or just do a shortened
position like contract position, a lengthened position.
And the way I look at that is I think well without better information that generally covered some of
the bases, that was probably the best someone could do at that point in time.
But with more information that doesn't like, it's not the best.
Yeah, I mean, I'm sympathetic to that view.
But equally, you know, if, if bodybuilders were already using pronated grip, you know, kind of to
target the Brachyridialis in the 1950s and before that, it kind of doesn't.
If, if you're, if you're kind of sort of rule of thumb or you're kind of training recommendation
that you're kind of devising, you know, lengthened and shortened is best way to cover everything.
If that doesn't cover stuff that silver era bodybuilders already knew, then I don't think you really
should be, you know, kind of trumpeting it from the rooftops because it's not better than what we've
already got, you know, because really our contention is that, you know, silver era bodybuilding
programmes are better than pretty much anything that you can find on the Internet today.
They are, you know, literally just by looking at the Physiology, you can see that they are.
And as I said at the beginning, and I hopefully argued reasonably well that you'd expect them to be
because they're not confused by the confounding effect of anabolics.
So you know, I think we've got anyway, we've got the number of factors that you can use to change
exercises and you can make use of the entire toolbox, not just joint angle, range of motion.
I think that's that's what we're saying here.
I think hopefully that has been a nice overview of exactly what it is we're talking about when we
say neuromechanical matching.
Why a lot of these kind of arguments I guess that are being thrown around a generally a
miscommunication of someone not understanding what it is they're actually talking about?
Is there anything further to this topic you wanted to finish on?
No, I think probably already gone way over in terms of detail and time that I was hoping to kind of
present today.
But yes, I agree with you.
I think we've covered the basics, we've covered the major common criticisms.
I've probably missed a couple.
But you know, if you're listening to this and you think, oh, I didn't answer my neuro mechanical
matching question, I'm sorry, please ask me in my Instagram questions.
I tend to do them on a Friday or a Saturday, you know, just ask me and I will do my best to answer
it there.
Or if there are enough of them, then we could even do another episode.
But I think we'll probably be able to pick them up as we go along.
And my hope is that when the conversation does come up over neuro mechanical matching, that now
there will be a whole lot of people in those comments sections who will be able to point to some of
this stuff and be like, well, no, that's actually not what it's about or you've missed this bit or
this.
And because I'm seeing that more and more often where people influences potentially talking about
topics that maybe they are misunderstanding.
And just the not often, not even coaches, these are just everyday people who are who have an
interest in this stuff, actually able to go there and be like, well, actually, no, that's this is
what you're missing there.
So I love seeing that.
So you guys who who actually are interested and passionate about this stuff, you guys rock.
But hopefully this has been, I think, like you said, this was a longer episode for us, but there was
a lot in this topic.
And I think it's it's valuable doing some of these longer episodes to actually walk people through
what can be a more complex topic.
So thank you guys for tuning in.
If you made it, what an hour and 40 minutes, Jeez, has been our longest episode.
Thank you if you made it to this point and hopefully you will join us for another, probably shorter
episode soon.