Episode: 029 Elevated MPS ≠ muscle growth
URL: https://open.spotify.com/episode/7aHJrh1wNf4cTZioVDi30M
Published: 2025-12-07
================================================================================

Welcome back everyone to another episode of Hypertrophy, past and present.
Thank you for joining us and thank you to everyone who did that.
I don't even know what it's called.
Spotify, is it Spotify unwrapped?
I think that's what it's called.
I am an Apple user.
But thank you to everyone who shared this podcast and tagged us and did all that stuff.
We appreciate it, all of you.
So thank you, as always, for doing the good stuff.
So we're back with another episode.
And Chris, how are you doing today?
Before I jump into my plan.
I'm doing well.
Thanks, Jake.
Good to be here.
Good to hear you're doing well.
I think last time we spoke you were a little bit sick, or maybe that was two weeks ago now.
Yeah, I know it was fun.
It's just the the turn of the the turn of the seasons.
As it gets colder and Rainier and the flus and the sniffles start going around.
I usually catch something briefly, but I'm I'm definitely a lot better now.
Well, I made fun of you.
I didn't make fun of you, but I made a comment at the time saying, oh, you get sick a lot and and
you get a little bit offended at me for saying that and think I think calm has got me and I'm
feeling a little bit rundown today and I've got a bit of a sore throat.
So that's that's what I get for making a comment about it.
Anyway, I'm going to jump into it today.
I want to talk about one of the most iconic lifters of the silver era.
Nowadays, someone we've spoken about just once before is actually a little bit shocked to go back
and realize that we've only ever talked about him one time because he was so influential as a silver
era lifter.
And that is a guy named John Grimmick, and John Grimmick is pretty remarkable.
So he did win.
Just so people know, basically we started off with some of these like Mr. America type competitions,
and Mr. Universe didn't exist yet.
And Krimic was winning Mr. America in the early 40s and then he was the first Mr. Universe
competition winner.
And there was like a couple of different Mr. Universe competitions that kind of reupted at a similar
time.
It's a little bit messy.
I won't get into the politics of it now, but he did win Mr. Universe in 1948 and he was winning Mr.
America's in the early 40s.
And what's cool about Grimmick and not just Grimmick, but a lot of these early I guess Miss Universe
winners Ridge Park would be in a similar field.
Is I love looking at this the I guess the skills that these lifters had.
So we look at some like John Grimmick and obviously amazing bodybuilder, you know, first sort of
Miss Universe and 48 and, you know, winning all these bodybuilding shows, but also such a gifted
Olympic lifter weightlifter.
You know, we, we look at the, you know, the Olympics and the weightlifting team and, and Bob Hoffman
as the code for the weightlifting team.
Literally calling Grimmick up like a, you know, a short time away from the Olympics and being
ultimately like, hey, we need more lifters.
Can you come and lift us?
And Grimmick being in a position where he could actually step in and be competitive at a
weightlifting Olympic level as ultimately a bodybuilder, like just unbelievable.
You know, we've got people like Grudge Park who are benching 500 lbs as a bodybuilder.
And you know, you hear people talk about bodybuilding today and how, you know, is it, does it
compare to what we see in in sort of strength field?
And it doesn't seem to have very more even, you know, even to the point that people will make
comments like, can I get strong doing bodybuilding training?
And it's like, well, hang on.
As a natural bodybuilder back in the day, they were literally the strongest people on the planet.
So I love looking at people like gimmick.
I love looking at people like Ridge Park and saying, hey, these guys who were trained to ultimately
be the best bodybuilder they could were naturally acquiring such high levels of strength that
they'll get it at a global scale.
So that's gimmick.
And this plan is technically you would say this is a post stereo aeroplane because he did write this
down after actually after he had experimented himself with anabolics.
Now I don't know if I covered this little bit of history when we first talked about in Grimmick was
actually presumably if the information we have is correct, Grimmick was actually the amongst the
first Americans to experiment with anabolics.
And that happened in 1954.
There was a team of maybe half a dozen or so York lifters who actually were part of that, I guess
you would say experiment.
Reportedly that first experimentation didn't particularly work out the way they, they I guess hoped.
And then it wasn't for a couple of years or few years after that until it sort of produced results
they were hoping for.
So Gimmick definitely did experiment with anabolics again, that was 1954.
What impact it had at that point in time, maybe a little bit questionable.
But then in the years following that, obviously that's when we start to see the effect of anabolics,
I guess more obviously.
So this plan was authored after anabolics were being used and it was not a plan that Gimmick was
following himself.
It was a plan that he recommended to people who wanted to gain muscular bulk or I guess ultimately
hypertrophy.
So you could argue, is this a pre anabolic plan is a post anabolic plan.
Could it have been influenced by how things have been shifting with the use of gear?
Potentially it might have been influenced.
My assumption looking at this is, hey, this guy competed.
Like he'd stopped competing by the time he was experimenting with anabolics.
I would assume that most of his programming principles had probably been consolidated at that point
and I would assume that he's probably programming in similar ways as he was doing himself when he
was natural.
So maybe I'm naive, but you guys can decide for yourself.
Does this look more like a pre anabolic plan or does it look like some of the post anabolic plans we
started to talk about and we'll continue to talk about in future episodes?
So that was a long preamble.
Let's talk about the plan.
This is like I said, a gaming plan or a hypertrophy plan, a bulking plan.
And it is it began with squats.
Now he did use some super sets here.
Now that I I guess you could call it like an exercise pair in some of these.
Usually they didn't involve a lot of time between the two exercises, but obviously they did involve
I guess setting up that specific exercise.
So he went from a squat and his first set of squats was a set of 15 into the classic pullovers.
So that's kind of a very common silly area method squatting paired with pullovers.
And generally these pullovers were not done for, I guess, Max effort.
They were kind of like a little bit lighter.
And this was first set of 15 as well.
Now he then went back to a squat and now he's reduced the weight.
OK, so he's sorry, he's increased the weight, reduced repetition.
So he's doing like AI guess sort of descending repetition pattern here.
So now he's doing a set of 10.
And now instead of super setting with pullovers, he's actually super setted with dumbbell fly, which
I think is a pretty interesting change and we'll talk about that I'm sure.
He then goes back into a squat and now again continues reducing repetitions.
And he now does a set of three to five repetitions and super sets that again with a pullover with a
set of 15.
So again, that lighter weight pullover.
And then finally we go into barbell shrugs, 2 sets of 10/2 sets of again, descending repetitions.
So he does a set of 11:50 and then a set of 6 to 8.
And then conventional deadlift, 2 sets of again 11:50 and then 5:00 to 6:00.
So he's descending his reps on all of these, then bent over barbell row two sets again set of 11:50
and 5:00 to 6:00.
And then a barbell overhead press 2 sets of eight to 10 and then three to five, his second set.
And then finally a barbell curl, a set of eight to 10 and then a set of three to five.
So every exercise he's except for the pullover, he's reduced repetitions in that second set.
Ultimately done about two sets per exercise except for the squats.
A bit different to other plans we've looked at so far.
What do you think about that?
So presumably he's doing this three times a week?
Yes.
So this is a kind of classic full body program, same exercises done three times a week.
This is, you know, not that I mean, the, the format of this feels slightly different from some of
the other things we've looked at.
But actually I don't think it's very far away in terms of the content and where you end up.
Because ultimately what he's doing, he's doing three sets of squats and in between his sets of
squats, he's doing like a chest exercise.
Now the pullover really is a chest exercise.
It's kind of a lower chest exercise.
And then his fly is kind of a probably, you know, everything exercise, but more so middle chest than
upper or lower.
So it's kind of a very much, you know, squats with a very, a very irrelevant, non non connected
exercise done in between the sets of squats.
I guess while he's while he's recovering and interestingly, the choice of exercise that he's doing
for the chest is quite non demanding.
He's not doing marbell bench press between sets of squats.
You know, he's doing something that actually is not too, you know, kind of onerous to perform.
So you can kind of see why he's he's doing that.
It's like I'm recovering from my squats.
I'm just going to do something easy rather than just sit around and stare at the wall.
So, you know, that makes a lot of sense.
You know, on paper you're right, it does look quite different on paper to what we've seen.
But it's not.
It's going to end up being that different.
It's not.
No.
And the main difference because they were always super setting squats with pullovers anyway.
So ultimately the main difference here is, he said, hey, one of those pullover sets, we're actually
going to swap it for a family, which is quite interesting if you think about what you're getting
with the fly compared to the pullover.
Yeah, it's just moving away from the dogmatic idea that the pullover is designed to open up the rib
cage, whatever nonsense they were thinking of.
And it's like, well, no, it's just a, it's just a chest exercise.
So, you know, kind of swapping it out with a dumbbell fly is totally logical if that's what you're
doing the exercise for.
So, you know, it's, it is consistent.
I think it's just, he's moved.
He's just playing like a theme and variations rather than sticking with the original theme.
So then he's going into, you know, some back work and it's really cool to see, you know, like a a
couple of dedicated back exercises in these programs.
I think ultimately this is the thing that is slightly different from what we do tend.
I mean, there are other programs with these exercises in.
It's just that he's got three, you know, together.
He's got a shrug, he's got a deadlift and he's got a, you know, a barbell row.
So that kind of really does emphasize that he is training back in a way that, you know, a lot of the
other programs we looked at do tend to be a little bit weak.
They might have one of those three, but they might not have even two or three of them.
And again, with a deadlift, we're getting some hamstrings training in there as well, which is
something else that we tend to miss out on in some other programs.
So really, I think the presence of back exercises and hamstrings exercises in this program is, is
probably the most kind of different from the main bulk of programs that we've seen.
And then of course, finishing with a, with an overhead press and and a curl.
So like when we were chatting about this before we came on the podcast, I was saying, really what I
see is as missing here, apart from the classic stuff that we always say, like the machines, because
they just didn't have access to them or weren't using them or weren't accustomed to using them.
So he hasn't got any extensions in the leg curls and that kind of stuff.
He hasn't actually got any calf razors in here.
OK, fine.
And he hasn't got any direct try such work and you would probably look at it and go in comparison
with many of the other programs we looked at is quite light on the pressing side of things.
But if you look at it, the combination of overhead press and the fly and the pullover actually does
kind of cover most of his bases if he's kind of a maybe more on the triceps dominant side anyway.
So you know, ultimately I don't think this is, I mean, actually that's kind of where I end up being
very triceps dominant.
It kind of would work for me.
I don't need direct triceps work.
It doesn't do anything for me because all my pressing is automatically triceps.
So really for me, I would be looking at this going assuming that we can't access the knee extension
and the leg curl and, and things like that.
Really I would go, you kind of probably want to put a calf raise in there and you probably would
want to have a like a pull up in there.
And that would be getting close to something that would work really well for me.
Somebody else might need the direct tricep text size or, you know, a lateral raise or something,
depending on what their, their, their sort of their leverages were.
But I like it.
I like it.
I think it's a, it's a really nice program.
Again, like I always say, whatever criticisms Ioffer of these programs, always in the context of it
still being a pretty good program and better than 90% of what we see on the Internet.
Just a couple of minor quibbles, really.
It is interesting the point about those chess exercises because initially one might look at that and
be like, oh, actually that does feel quite light on with chess.
There's no, you know, flat bench, for example.
And Grimek didn't do a whole lot of benching anyway.
So I'm not surprised that we don't see that.
But in fact, when you do look at it in a little bit more detail and you've got the fly, you've got
the pullover and you've got the the overhead press, you realize that actually for a particular
person that's that's quite a robust or a well developed chess program anyway, isn't it?
Totally, totally.
I mean, like for people who, you know, sort of perhaps are, as I say, triceps dominant and they
don't need direct triceps work, they're getting all of that from the overhead press anyway.
I think, you know, putting those couple of test exercises in with the dumbbell fly and the and the
pullover probably gets you most of the way there.
And again, it's just like, you know, as a as an Olympic lifter, he probably wouldn't really need a
lot to work on on delts anyway because he's probably able to get that from his overhead work.
So, yeah, I think he's got a really nice program for him.
You know, could you make it slightly better?
Yeah, sure.
How much of that would require, you know, machines?
Probably most of it, but yeah, there's a couple of things.
But again, like I say, every time, or hopefully nearly every time, there's this is a great program.
It's just minor, minor details we'd want to sort of address.
A couple of things I really like about this, which you know, I'm biased because what I like about
them is the reason that I program them myself is firstly that he's doing for all these exercises
except for this squat, he's doing 2 sets and I like that two sets.
It's a sweet spot for a lot of people.
And what I find interesting that we do see with a lot of these silver area plans is often when
someone, not all the time, but often when someone does do more than one or two sets, it's often in
the squat.
And as you've identified, they're not doing leg extensions at this point almost ever.
And so it tends to be in the exercise or in the muscle group that they're only training with one
exercise really.
Most of these other muscles are usually getting trained with two exercises.
So I find it interesting that they're waiting a little bit more volume towards the muscle group,
which is a little bit more limited in what it's actually getting trained by, for starters.
And I also like this descending repetitions where if we're using barbells, like most of this plan is
barbell bells, a couple of dumbbell exercise, but mostly barbells.
That first set of about 10 repetitions, that's I find that a really nice spot where a lot of the
time if you've done an exercise that maybe uses some of those muscles earlier in the workout, that
next exercise we're doing a set of 10.
It may not even need any warm up sets.
Maybe it needs one at most.
And so to start with that set of 10 and then go into this heaviest set of five or whatever he's
doing, depending on the exercise.
I find that quite a nice sweet spot where you're minimizing set up, you're not having to load the
bar so heavy in that first set.
You're minimizing warm up sets, but then you're also getting that nice heavy second set that is sort
of mitigating some of that fatigue that might be coming along.
And you're getting 2 sets, which you know, arguably is maybe the most, the best, I guess, return on
investment in terms of potential fatigue mechanisms and stimulus.
Yeah.
The combination of practical and physiological factors there I think is, is persuasive, you know,
doing doing it that way around.
I have to say though, when it comes to machines where the warm up isn't such a big practical
component, I really prefer to do it the other way around.
I'd really much rather do my heavy set and then back off and do a lighter set and not light, light,
but like, you know, moderate reps sort of eight to 10 after doing it like a 5 or a six.
I think that's much, much preferable.
But yeah, totally understand that when you've got practical considerations with barbells, the other
way around does seem to work a lot.
Better, Yeah, I think it's for me it's heavily dependent on how many warm up sets with that exercise
need.
Because even like there's some machines where you may need more or fewer warm up sets depending on
what that exercise is as well.
And certainly if it's an exercise in like for me, a lateral raise machine, I love that you can just
go immediately, go heavy, do one warm up set, go heavy, do the stack, whatever.
And you're not sort of limited by having to do these sort of step loading warm up sets.
But then, you know, obviously if you're using a doing a barbell overhead press or something like
that, it's going to be a little bit different.
So I do think it's easy to overlook some of those practical components when you're just looking on
paper and then you go in into the gym, you give it a go and you're like, oh, that's why they did
that maybe.
Totally, totally.
We've always got to have that mindset when we look at these older programs because those were the
limitations that they were working with.
So we can't just superimpose our expectations based on the fact that we stroll into this wonderfully
equipped gym and have any of the machines that we want accessible to us.
That's that's just not the world that we're living in.
I want to finish by saying one more thing about John Gremic that I think is quite interesting, and
then we're going to talk about what the topic is for this episode.
Gremic I think maybe I've mentioned the past when we did talk about him that he was he, he grew up
doing single sets.
Like his, his early career, he only ever did single sets, multiple sets didn't particularly exist at
that point.
And to the point that he, he tells in an interview, he recalls that when he'd, when he started
training, he said someone actually asked him like, Hey, you know, how many sets were you doing in
this program?
When you're, when you're starting this, this plan that you began with?
And he literally goes sets.
We didn't even have that word.
We did not use the word sets.
We didn't know what sets were.
So a lot of these old workouts, and this is not an example of this, but a lot of the workouts you
might see in books, they don't specify sets because they literally didn't exist.
And it's really easy.
Mistake I see a lot of people make online is they'll then hear later interviews with people, whether
it's Premiere or Steve Reeves or some of these bodybuilders where some of these people might say I
did three sets, I did 2 sets, I did whatever.
And then they go back and they find these old plans before sets existed where these individual was
in fact performing a single set and they superimpose that, you know, three sets, three sets,
whatever.
So the amount of plans that I've personally seen online of some of these very old plans where I know
that these people were doing single sets.
And then the people online have said, Oh, no, no, you know, they've, they've said three sets next to
each exercise or whatever.
Because they've taken that later sort of snippet of of an interview or whatever disappoint I wanted
to make because I see this all the time, especially with some of these early Mr. Universe and
competitors where actually, no, these plans, they, they don't specify sets because they didn't do
sets.
They just were doing single sets.
Anyway, just a bit of a tangent.
Today we are talking about MPs.
We are muscle protein synthesis.
So this is this is a question that's been rumbling around in the fitness industry for quite a long
time.
It reached a bit of a peak in its sort of in the interest levels that people have for it a while
back, a couple of months ago and maybe a little bit longer.
And it persists in being an area that people just don't understand.
And I think there's a really big blind spot, especially as to what is being measured and what it
means.
So I just want to tackle part of that problem, that part part of that debate today.
Essentially we've got 22 kind of things to think about to start with what what it actually is and
then what we're measuring.
So essentially what we're what what it is, is when we talk about muscle protein synthesis or
myofibrilla protein synthesis, we're talking about the rate at which proteins are being literally
synthesized, so built or made inside the muscle fibers that we're interested in.
Now we can, we can kind of measure that, but what researchers are basically trying to get at is a
proxy for the extent to which hypertrophy is happening.
And that's a slightly separate question.
And that's where people are kind of getting tripped up because ultimately.
Every muscle fiber has a rate of muscle protein synthesis that is going on in the background all the
time, and it will go up and down according to the stimuli that it's experiencing and the conditions
in which it's, you know, sitting in.
We've also simultaneously got a muscle protein breakdown rate, which is going in the opposite
direction.
So you've got synthesis building and then breakdown, which is the destruction.
So you've got these two opposing rates.
Now technically, if you have a synthesis rate that equals your breakdown rate, then you're basically
just going to have nothing happening all the time now.
A long time ago in research terms, when hypertrophy researchers were looking at what happened in the
post workout period, they noticed that muscle protein breakdown rates didn't change, you know,
astronomically and that the muscle protein synthesis rate was the thing that really jumped,
especially in the first kind of, you know, 4 to 8 hours post workout.
So they kind of said, look, you know, we don't feel like we need to go to the trouble of measuring
muscle protein breakdown rates all the time.
Because when we're thinking about the hypertrophy stimulus that's being produced by workout, we
think that muscle protein synthesis rate changes are the best way of describing it.
Because actually, you know, muscle protein breakdown are a separate measurement.
It's actually a lot harder than muscle protein synthesis to measure.
And so as a result, it's a lot easier and cheaper to construct your experiment only measuring muscle
protein synthesis and not measuring muscle protein breakdown if you want to gauge how much stimulus
you're getting from a particular workout.
Now, for reasons that we can get into later, that's not a horrible way of doing things if you're
only interested in, you know, the kind of the immediate post workout period of like say the 1st 1224
hours or maybe, you know, that kind of broadly sort of defined period.
What you can't do and what people are starting to do and they're getting tripped up is to extend
things outside of that period and go muscle protein synthesis rates are always indicative of
hypertrophy, of the extent to which hypertrophy is happening.
That is going to cause you some serious problems and you're going to end up in a lot of difficulty
if you do that because most protein breakdown rates can move around a lot and they can't depending
on the situation.
I'll explain what those situations are in a moment.
And so if people come to a scenario and go, oh look, NPS is elevated or Myops is elevated and they
don't think about what else is happening in the scenario and we're kind of drifting outside of that
first 12 to 24 hour period post workout, you're really not going to get the answer you're expecting
if you just look at MPs.
You're going to have to look at MPs and most protein breakdown at the same time.
Otherwise, you're not getting the right answer to understand what's happening in terms of the net,
what I call the net protein balance of that period of time that you're investigating.
So what I'm clarifying here is that when we're looking at studies that are measuring MPs or my OPS
in the post workout period, it's technically not correct, truly, truly correct to say that MPs is a
perfect reflection of what's happening.
But it broadly is in the 1st 1224 hours.
When you go outside of that period, it really isn't for reasons that we can get into in a moment.
So is this making sense so far?
Yeah, great.
So you're saying the first sort of 12:00-ish hours, we're not seeing a significant change in muscle
protein breakdown yet?
Yes.
Yeah.
So ultimately, as I've said a number of times, and I know it remains contentious in some parts of
the science based lifting communicative because they're looking at the wrong kind of metrics.
But you know, if you look at direct markers of muscle damage, they don't exist in the first six
hours at all.
But there just isn't any muscle damage there.
Muscle damage really is pretty limited.
It takes time to develop.
Calpain production takes time to develop to a point when it's actually creating damage and then you
have the inflammatory response that kicks off after that.
So we're not really creating much damage until the kind of back end of that first day and spilling
over into the second day.
Normally the exact timeline varies because really the amount of damage you create determines how
quickly it gets processed.
If you create a very minimally, if you, if your workout is minimally damaging, let's say you do a
couple of clusters and contract position exercises and that's it, then you're going to create so
little damage that yeah, it will get processed faster.
If you create a lot of damage, you do a whole bunch of ecentrics, for example, you're probably going
to be spilling out past the second day before it really finishes getting processed.
And muscle protein breakdown is kind of like your first clearance sort of metric.
It's it's going to stop pulling all the stuff out that you don't need.
So you're going to see an increase in muscle protein breakdown at the point when you've got damaged
tissue to remove.
So ultimately that isn't something you're going to see happening early on in the post workout
period.
So we tend to kind of associate it with it with more a more delayed effect.
And when we're looking at MPs and muscle protein breakdown, especially in the context of like post
workout, is that telling us systemic levels?
Is it telling us fiber levels?
Is it telling us muscle levels?
What are we actually seeing with those numbers?
What's being measured?
So when you take, well it depends on the the experimental model.
So if you look at the experiments that researchers are doing today in humans, then they take
biopsies.
So they will literally take a muscle biopsy and then they'll, you know, kind of assess that piece of
tissue that they've removed from the body.
So what you're getting there is an index of literally the muscle tissue that you just pulled out the
body.
So it's very, very specific to the exact area.
So you can kind of run into difficulties there if you're taking stuff from the wrong part of the
muscle.
And there's all kinds of issues associated with that.
But, you know, that's not kind of be too critical of that because they're just problems that we
always face with that kind of analysis in older studies.
What you'll find is that they actually do or systemic measurements, but in those scenarios.
And so they're usually taking kind of measurements of what's happening in the blood.
They're taking measurements of what's happening in the blood in terms of nitrogen balance.
So that is really a separate type of experiment and it's not very commonly done anymore, but it kind
of gives you a more systemic kind of view on what's going on depending on the model.
That's valid.
You know, you wouldn't want to do it if you were just training one muscle.
You know, it's kind of more for a whole body type immobilization scenario that's really good because
of course the entire body is immobilized.
So you can kind of get this interesting systemic effect across the whole body of what's happening in
terms of muscle protein breakdown in that scenario or muscle protein synthesis in that scenario.
You get an idea of whole kind of body protein balance in that specific situation.
And as I say, immobilisation, bed rest as in true like not immobilisation for a limb, but bed rest.
It's a really nice way of assessing that because you do have that whole body kind of sort of
assessment.
You also have that if, for example, somebody has a traumatic injury and they get hypercortisolemia
as a result of that traumatic injury, again, you're going to see a muscle protein breakdown effect
affects the whole body.
Again, measuring that systemically is an interesting way of doing that because you've got whole body
effect happening, totally different from what you'd be talking about.
If you would like just doing biceps girls, you would never want to do that.
In that situation, you'd want to take a biopsy.
Yeah, great.
OK.
And presumably when we're looking at things like, say, traditional studies and they're looking at
proteins affecting MPs.
Exactly, Exactly, exactly, exactly.
Well, you can.
I mean you can do it depends what you're doing.
I mean, like if you're measuring like the effect of protein feeding on like a strengthening workouts
to so whether it has a cumulative effect, then you'd still go down the biopsy route because you'd
want to be like, I've just done 10s of some knee extensions or whatever silly program that they tend
to do, like whatever number of sets of knee extensions.
And then you eat like some protein and then you see what the compound effect of eating that protein
is on the protein synthesis rates inside the quadriceps muscle.
So you know, it depends on the nature of the study.
But yes, you're right.
You could also go down the systemic route if you were just say for example, you would again back to
the immobilization study if you were saying, so if I eat some protein while I'm in a mobilised
state, does it protect me from losing muscle mass, which it doesn't, but does it, does it change
muscle protein balance in that scenario?
Perfect.
OK so we've got the 1st 812 hours post workout then what do we go do next?
So what what I'm saying is that the studies that we tend to look at regarding the post workout
muscle protein senses response or mild response and most of them run to kind of like anywhere up to
24 hours.
And in that period of time that's fine.
You're kind of looking at a period of time in which hypertrophy is mostly being stimulated in that
window, not really much beyond that.
After that you've got other stuff going on.
But as I say, extrapolating the muscle protein synthesis responses from that particular scenario, so
number one, it's immediately poster strength training workout and #2 it's a short period of time
after that strength training workout.
You can't sort of extrapolate that and say anytime muscle protein synthesis is elevated, we're
experiencing A anabolic effect.
And therefore, you know, we're in a sort of a hypertrophy experiencing scenario.
So what a lot of people are doing is they're saying any time MPs is elevated above a level that I
would expect just from walking around, any time that's happening, I'm in a protected state and the
muscle is not going to be atrophying.
And that is not correct because outside of this very specific scenario, which is immediately post
workout, you've actually got other stuff going on in which you might be experiencing a balance
between muscle protein synthesis and muscle protein breakdown that's ending up being negative rather
than positive.
So what I'm saying is we've got a set of studies that look at NPS or my OPS in a very specific time
window after a very specific kind of event, which is a stranger in workout in like usually either
untrained or lightly trained people and without other weirdness going on.
So you're not measuring things like where somebody's sleep deprived or stressed or in calorie
restriction.
I mean, there are a couple of studies that have done that in calorie restriction, but the majority
are done like, you know, in a standard kind of situation where people are in calorie balance.
So as soon as you start messing around with those variables, you're changing what's happening and
your assumptions now are not going to be valid compared to, you know, the majority of the literature
that you're referencing.
So I'm just kind of trying to get people to think about when they're talking about MPs, if they're
referencing that body of literature.
And there's like a dozen or so studies that have been done in this area.
So people do reference them.
And I was like, if you're referencing post workout MPs rates or post workout Myal rates, which are
all kind of in that first 24 hour period post workout in, you know, people that are just living a
normal life without trying to do diets or anything crazy like that.
So it's going to give you one set of results and you can't extrapolate that necessarily to a whole
bunch of other scenarios.
So adding to that, I just want to kind of very quickly throw in another observation to just kind of
further detach this idea that any time MPs or Myops is elevated, you're automatically in a kind of a
hypertrophic or anabolic state.
So this, I've, I've documented this like a dozen times.
I keep telling people this and it just seems to keep flying over people's heads.
And they just like, they nod at me and like, yeah, yeah, yeah.
And then they go back to just ignoring what I've said.
So I've said this a bunch of times, so let me say it again.
There's four really clear scenarios in which we can elevate MPs on Myops and not experience
hypertrophy afterwards.
So let me just list these out and then we can kind of talk about something more interesting
afterwards.
But I keep saying this, I'm just going to say again.
So if you have an what I call a non exercise muscle injury or non exercise muscle damage.
So there's a whole bunch of different models that researchers use in the literature.
You can do this in in a number of ways.
The probably the most elegant is a like a minor contusion model.
And all this involves is like usually a plastic PVC pipe pointing downwards and there's like the
animal muscle is just at the bottom of the pipe.
And then you drop a very small weight, like a ball bearing down the pipe and it produces a small
bruise on the muscle of the animal.
In fact, they're starting to develop this model in humans now.
So they're literally just got a pipe they put on the quadriceps muscle and they drop a small weight
and it and you like it.
Ow.
And, and then like you get a small bruise in a very localized way, in a very controlled amount.
And then they measure what happens to the body after that, experiencing that non exercise muscle
injury.
And you get an elevation in MPs.
Now, interestingly, it's delayed, delayed by 2448 hours depending on how much injury there was
created.
So you tend to see that, like I was saying earlier, you don't see it immediately like you would do
with a hypertrophic stimulus.
It's pushed outwards, but you still get an elevation in MPs or miles.
It's not creating hypertrophy.
I hope that people don't think that it's creating hypertrophy.
You know, really don't want people to go taking that idea away.
I don't want to be responsible for that.
So, you know, it's, it's very much a muscle damage response and MPs is being elevated, of course, to
replace the previously damaged tissue.
So non exercised muscle injury.
Great example of when MPs is elevated not creating hypertrophy.
Now now just to answer a criticism that has been raised, some people have said Oh yes, but that
doesn't involve an M Tor response.
Yes it does.
Yes it does.
So M Tor again is involved in the signaling of muscle damage repair in the same way that it's
involved in the signaling of hypertrophy.
You can't say that the MPs elevation in muscle damage not caused by excise is different from the
muscle damage caused by exercise or the hypertrophy caused by exercise.
M Tor is elevated in both scenarios are exactly the same.
There is no difference between the two.
So when people are saying Oh yeah, they're separate things because M Tor is different.
No it's not and I've done a whole FAQ on that.
So that's that's just a non exercise muscle damage.
You can also get a an MPs increase from eating protein.
Now this is the one that really people get confused about because they go, OK, so if I eat protein
post workout, it enhances the post workout hypertroid response and OK, fantastic.
So protein is anabolic.
Well, no.
It's synergistically anabolic.
If you add it to the body during a post workout period, it's not anabolic on its own.
So if you don't do any strength training and you just eat protein, it's not going to have that same
anabolic effect and create hypertrophy, but it still elevates much protein synthesis.
So it's elevating the rate at which you're replacing proteins, but it's not adding new tissue on top
of what you've already got.
Does that make sense?
So you can absolutely create an MPs elevation with eating protein, but it doesn't have to create
hypertrophy if you don't eat that protein, you know, while you're concurrently performing a strength
training program.
So again, like MPs is being elevated here, it's not leading automatically to hypertrophy.
So there's that disconnect there, which people are essentially at the moment denying.
They're saying anytime MPs is elevated, we're getting hypertrophy.
No, you're not.
So I don't want to jump the gun, but if that happens to say someone didn't do a strength training
workout and they ate more protein and MPs was elevated, like what happened is that MPs is wasted.
Is there an increase in muscle protein basically to make up for that?
Yeah, exactly.
What you're doing is you're accelerating protein turnover.
So you're basically getting an in and out, but you're you're essentially just replacing stuff that's
already there.
There's no signal to actually add on top of what you've already got.
That's the missing piece.
That's the bit that people miss.
They're like, what is mechanical tension doing?
And it's telling you that you're going to be adding new stuff if you don't have the mechanical
tension signal, you know, or arguably the anabolic steroid signal, but that's a separate question.
If you don't have that, then what you're going to find is that you end up just turning over then the
stuff that you've already got, it's just going to be in and out, in and out.
It's not going to be adding on top of what you've already got.
Even so you will see the elevation in MPs or Myops.
You're not going to then pass that all the way through to what you're expecting, which is an
increase in muscle tissue.
And in that situation that MPs elevation that like are we seeing that across sort of all muscle
fibers?
Are we seeing that?
That's more we're just measuring that systemically.
How do we see that in terms of protein?
So again, this depends on the model that the researchers have taken.
So if you're taking a biopsy, it's usually going to be in the context of doing a strength training
workout because they're training specific muscles.
So you would expect them to look more systemically.
If they were kind of looking at whole protein, sorry, whole body effects of protein feeding without
it being a specific exercise stimulus.
You'd probably expect them to use a a more kind of systemic measurement.
But honestly, that is nutrition science.
That's not something that I spend a lot of time reading.
So that's was that two so far two times.
Yeah, we've had two, two things that we've covered so far.
So what I've tried to do there is cover the two that I think are most interesting because they're
completely non exercise related.
The last two or the second two are slightly closer to exercise.
So aerobic exercise, you can get elevations in my OPS for days post workout.
And interestingly, this is the one that's really tripped people up.
So people used to rave about a study that had elevated my OPS for 72 hours post an aerobic exercise
workout and they used to run around going, see look, we've got this hypertrophy stimulus period
that's lasting 3 days.
OK.
So straight away they've fallen to both traps that I outlined at the beginning of this conversation
where I said first trap is that my OPS studies that are linked to that are done in the post workout
period.
And where you've got connections with long term hypertrophy, they're really assessing that first 24
hour period primarily.
And secondly, they're done immediately post strength training workouts.
So they've fall into both of those traps because they've tried to extrapolate that knowledge base to
A, an aerobic exercise workout and B, a 72 hour period.
So it just doesn't work like that.
So what's happening is that that raric excise workout is producing a muscle damage, which is taking
time to repair.
And as we've talked about before, muscle damage, muscle damage takes a lot longer to fix than
hypertrophy takes to implement.
So you can create hypertrophy really quickly.
Muscle damage repair is a much, much slower process.
So there's a really nice pair of studies which is looked at post workout Myop's rate elevations
after a kicking style activity.
And they also did the same activity for a long term training program and produced 0 hypertrophy.
They also produced some really interesting resist resistance to fatigue adaptations that are, you
know, definitely worth thinking about as some interesting buffering capacity changes going in there
relating to metabolite fatigue processes.
Was there was stuff going on.
It was a stimulus that was creating some fatigue resistance adaptations, but it wasn't translating
to any hypertrophy.
As I say you the same kind of workout produced post workout Myops rate elevation.
So or MPSI forget exactly which one it was.
But ultimately you've got this kind of demonstration that aerobic exercise doesn't produce
meaningful muscle growth if any you know and ultimately yet still produces that that post workout
MPs on myops rate elevation.
And then finally you've got static stretching.
Now this is a like an advanced level topic.
So if this doesn't make sense to you, then it doesn't matter.
Just go and read the FAQ.
Basically, when we talk about the muscle growth that happens from static stretching, it's
sarcomerogenesis.
It's not strictly hypertrophy.
It's not an increase in diameter.
It doesn't add myofibrils in parallel.
It's not the same thing.
Even though the hypertrophy researchers call it stretch mediate hypertrophy, it's actually something
different.
It's sarcamergenesis.
You're adding sarcamazine series.
If you look at the sarcomaeogenesis literature, you can see that you can have sarcomeres being added
in series simultaneously with myofibrils in parallel being lost.
So you're actually getting atrophy happening on a whole muscle level because you're reducing the
number of myofibrils in parallel.
But simultaneously you're still adding sarcomeres in series because you're holding the muscle in a
stretch position, usually in immobilised state.
If you look at those immobilisation studies where they kind of take a muscle and they kind of put it
in a in a splint or.
Like in a cast, then what you see is that over the period of a couple of weeks, you're adding soccer
in series and as I say, simultaneously atrophying the muscle.
MPs is absolutely off the charts in those scenarios.
It is just ridiculously high because you've got this huge stimulus being applied every second of
every day.
So NPS jumps and it comes down as the stimulus reduces because you're adding more Sogmers in series,
which is relieving the passive tension that you were previously experiencing.
And you end up back kind of in an equilibrium state after a week or two or whatever the period of
time is.
So static stretching or stretch induced muscle growth or you know, kind of arguably is it muscle
growth?
Well, it technically is adding sogmers in series.
So it's new muscle tissue you're adding, but you're simultaneously using even more in other places
because you've got this atrophy effect happening because of the immobilization really static
stretching completely or the immobilization models completely destroy all ideas that you could have,
you know, always a hypertrophic stimulus whenever you've got MPs rates elevated.
Because literally the studies in immobilization studies show that any time you have soccer, soccer
genesis being produced, you've also got this big Myops rate elevation happening.
That's simultaneously you're actually also losing muscle tissue on a mass.
Like if you're measuring it by mass, you're actually losing mass over the course of the of the study
because you're losing faster, you're losing myofibbles in parallel faster than you're losing.
Then you're adding sarcumazin.
So those are the four things.
Basically.
It's just like those hopefully disconnect.
This idea that you can just simply elevate Myops and always be in an anabolic state just doesn't
work like that.
And some of those have been studied in humans.
Obviously the protein and the aerobic elevation MPs are both in.
And I think I think we're going to get non exercise muscle injury soon.
As I say, there is definitely at least one study out there where people have been dropping small
weights onto quadriceps muscles in people and getting some early indications of muscle damage.
You know, the pretty, what I would call weak measurements in terms of the not, not the quality of
the way that the measurements have been done, but just in terms of what they're telling us.
The data that's been collected isn't very useful, but it's it's moving in that direction.
So I would hope that we would have, in a year or two, some interesting non excise muscle damage data
in humans as well.
OK.
So it's it's not contentious really to to say that you know what NPS can be elevated without
hypertrophy occurring.
Well, I don't think so, but you know, I've, I've sat and listened to hypertrophy researchers
basically say that whenever myops is elevated, the muscle is in an anabolic state.
And I'm like, that is so easy to falsify.
I mean, four different ways I've presented that you can falsify that statement and it just proves my
point, which is that hypertrophy research is very siloed at the moment.
It's, it's in a silo.
They, they literally read their own 20-30 studies and they don't seem to read anything outside of
that area.
And it's like literally just go look at psychogenesis, go and look at some fatigue literature.
Go and look at some of the medical, you know, muscle damage literature.
Get yourself out of the immediate area that you've been reading in and you'll immediately see that
your basic assumption is false, and I can tell you why you made it.
You made it because you've a long time ago decided that this post workout window was enough to
measure just muscle proteins and synthesis.
You need to measure anything else.
If you look outside of that particular window with those conditions, that assumption's no longer
valid.
So what I want to move on to now though, which I think is something I've not talked about much
before, which builds on the podcasts that we've been doing over the last few weeks where we've
talked about things like sleep, we've talked about the stress and caloric restriction and all those
things that produce glucocorticoid responses.
I just want to talk a little bit about some of the data that we've got in both animals and humans.
So this is not, I know that some people sort of switch off when I start talking about Physiology,
you know, relying heavily on animal models.
So I'm actually going to, you know, kind of focus mainly on a set of studies been done on humans
quite a while ago.
And they, this research laboratory did a series of studies in a number of different scenarios and
they measured simultaneously muscle protein synthesis and muscle protein breakdown and they got a
net protein balance in each scenario.
Now, these guys are not a laboratory that you're likely to come across naturally when you're doing,
you're reading into hypertrophy because they're actually focused on atrophy.
They're focused on things like bed rest, They're focused on caloric restriction, they're thinking
about hypercorticolemia, so sleep restriction, and they're thinking about what happens in traumatic
injuries.
So let me just give a very quick overview of what their studies have kind of shown us.
So essentially, they found that you get sort of a negative protein balance.
So breakdown is bigger than synthesis in a number of scenarios.
You get it in immobilization.
So bed rest is their typical model for that.
They're not doing immobilization where they put a limb in a cast because they're not thinking about
single muscles.
They're thinking about all of this on a whole body level really.
So look at bed rest as their immobilization model.
They look at caloric restriction.
So they just say what happens if we start fasting, for example, because they're looking at extremes
because they want to test.
So don't run away with the idea that this is about, you know, what happens when you start dieting a
little bit.
This is about pushing the boundaries to see, you know, what happens in, in glucocorticoid scenarios
where, where, where the lack of calories is a stressor Now, not, not, not something that is just
kind of like a mild kind of effect.
So they're looking at bed rest, they're looking at fasting, and they look at what we call
experimental hypercortisolemia, which is basically like kind of a glucocorticoid, an exogenous
glucocorticoid response.
So you kind of get a kind of a like a corticosteroid.
And then they look at, obviously this is a limited experimental model because you can only do it
when you know, people come into the hospital with an accident.
But if somebody has an accident and they get injured, then obviously they tend to be on a hospital
bed and it kind of combines them being in bed rest with a massive glucocorticoid response
simultaneously.
So obviously when you have a traumatic injury, the body just floods everything with cortisol, so you
get this really big kind of hypercortisolemia effect.
So you can look at all these different scenarios and now this laboratory have taken the same exact
measurements in a number of scenarios.
So you can kind of put them all next to each other and go these are pretty comparable in the way
that they've been for.
You're not, you're not comparing, you know, one MPs measurement from 1 laboratory with an MPs
measurement from another laboratory.
They're all the same guys are doing the same experiments.
And so it's all pretty comparable.
Now in that context, if we just look at some of these numbers, what you see is that immobilization
has a really interesting feature.
Now, we know from other data in humans that's been measured more recently that the main reason why
we experience atrophy during immobilization is because MPs tanks, it just drops to almost nothing.
So this is this has been one of those discoveries that has kind of fed the idea that MPs is the only
thing that matters.
So when hypertrophy researchers look at very briefly, I imagine the immobilization literature, they
kind of see one study or two studies that say, oh, look, you know, immobilization, the reason we
lose muscle mass is because of MPs dropping.
They're like, oh, yeah, that confirms my bias.
Let me go back to, you know, whatever it is I was doing before and they just go MPs.
Is there anything that matters?
Yeah, immobilization, you get a massive drop in MPs back to almost nothing.
Interestingly, if you look at MPB muscle protein, and it also decreases down to almost nothing, you
still get a net negative protein turnover.
So you're still losing muscle size, but the actual, you know, sorry, net protein balance, you're
still getting pretty minimal.
You're still getting a loss of muscle protein tissue, but you're actually also getting pretty
minimal turnover.
And those are separate questions.
So what we're seeing is not only in immobilization situations is not only do we see net protein
negative scenarios, we're actually losing muscle tissue.
We're also seeing pretty low MPs, pretty low MPB.
So the overall turnover is pretty small.
So it is a there's a muscle loss scenario.
It's just one of those muscle loss scenarios where the actual insurance and outs aren't very big at
all now.
When you really know the MPB must be the MPs is.
Reduced into bigger, yeah, yeah, absolutely.
Yeah, yeah.
So the MPB.
But The thing is, if you're, if you're coming at this from a perspective of your hypertrophy kind of
bias, you would look at it and go, yeah, So I'm expecting MPs to be the primary driver of whether
the muscles in anabolic states when it drops.
That's confirming what I'm expected to see, you know, no problem at all.
That is, that is exactly in line with expectations.
The interesting thing is though, that when you look at sort of going from a normal state to fasting,
again, MPs drops.
But fasting like we talked about in the calorie restriction scenario, long term fasting to somebody
who's unaccustomed to it is actually going to be a stressor.
So you actually experience a a drop in MPs, but you experience a really big increase in MPB as well.
So if you were just looking at the change from normal calorie balance walking around to fasting,
walking around, you would actually see a relatively small decrease in MPs that you're like, how does
that explain what I'm seeing in terms of atrophy?
It doesn't.
It doesn't because you're actually in this really big increase in MPB, which is accounting for a
bigger portion of your net protein loss.
So your turnover is a lot bigger in calorie restriction than it is in mobilization.
It's just again, you've got these differences in MPs and MPB to be happening in comparison with what
you'd see in in normal life, just day-to-day walking around.
But what's really interesting is when you start to push the territory into scenarios like
hypercortilemia and a traumatic injury, which is like supposed to be the kind of the real life
analogue of experimental hypercortilemia.
The really interesting thing about traumatic injury plus bed rest is it looks absolutely nothing
like bed rest on its own.
So experimental hypercortisolina, which is the exogenous application of corticosteroid and traumatic
injury actually look pretty much the same.
So what you actually get is a gigantic increase in MPs and a colossal increase in MPB.
I mean, just ridiculous.
So when you put these next to each other on a chart, you kind of, if you didn't have the MPB, you
would think that traumatic injury was hypertrophic.
Yeah.
And you would also think your Cortico steroid was hypertrophy, which is insane, right.
So you've got to actually say when you look at the balance and you end up with this massive net
protein loss as your kind of output.
And it's primarily because you are massively increasing protein turnover at the same time your your
protein breakdown has increased more than your muscle protein genesis.
So well, The thing is without knowing what else is going on with protein breakdown as well as much
protein synthesis, you can't really just look aside from that very specific scenario I mentioned
earlier, which is like in the immediate post workout period after a strain training workout, 1st 24
hours, yeah, sure.
NPS is the only thing that's moving around.
Yeah, you can look at that and you can make conclusions on that.
Outside of that and anytime you've got calorie restriction or steep restriction or glucocortico
responses from something else like a corticosteroid or you know, whatever it may be, traumatic
injury, anytime you've got those factors playing into the mix or you're outside of that first 24
hour window, you can't do what people are doing, which is just to say, oh, MPs is elevated,
therefore I'm in a hypertrophic state was like, no, you're not, I don't.
You can't say that.
It just, it might be anything that's going on.
Even in that example, in the post workout window, you could have two different individuals who might
display somewhat similar elevations in MPs, but if you're not measuring MPB, one individual could
have.
Sure.
So if it would depend on the, yeah.
So if one was more stressed than the other, you'd have a glucocorticoid response, which means you
get an MPP effect, which would be detracting from the overall net printing balance.
Or one person could be on antibiotic steroids, in which case, again, they'd have a reduced, you
know, kind of muscle protein breakdown rate.
So there's, there's all kinds of of, of things that can play into that.
But I'm being, I'm being kind of like fair.
And I'm saying, yeah, I think if you're just looking at that first 24 hours, the thing that's moving
around is mostly MPs, if not exclusively MPs.
But what you can't do is extrapolate that literature and suddenly start making claims like any time
MPs is elevated, I'm in an anabolic state.
I'm like, that is immediately falsifiable and absolute garbage when it when it comes to what's
actually happening.
One of the interesting studies I picked up.
So all of the data I've just been talking about with, you know, kind of bed rest and and fasting and
all that kind of thing, that's all human data.
So that's all human studies that were done decades ago.
You actually get a very similar picture in animal models.
So I always laugh when I look at studies in chickens.
I don't know why, but it just, it just seems funnier than than looking at rodent studies.
But anyway, there's a, there's a, there's some really cool stuff in, in chickens.
The reason they they look at chicken studies more recently, I mean, obviously there's the famous
chicken studies of the 70s and 80s when researchers were looking at stretch mediated hypertrophy.
Later on in the 90s and 2000s, most of the chicken studies are actually done by people who want to
or understand better the farming processes of housing chickens in, you know, safe environments so
that they can grow maximally.
And the interesting thing is that one of the variables that they look at in terms of understanding
the environment in which chickens are most likely to grow in is ambient temperature.
So it's a very simple thing to modify.
So they, they, they measure ambient temperature and they house these chickens in a range of
different temperatures, you know, relatively close to optimal temperature, which turns out to be
around about, you know, sort of 2528 kind of ballpark figure.
And you get maximum growth rates and maximum net protein balance around that temperature.
If you go outside of that range, if you start dropping down towards the low 20s or you start pushing
up into, you know, over 30, you start to see a drop in the growth rate of the chicken.
You start to see a drop in the net protein balance if you're measuring the difference between muscle
protein tenses and muscle protein breakdown.
So that's what we see objectively in terms of muscle growth, protein chicken growth, if you like, if
that's symmetric and like you got to see like, OK, so my chickens are growing best at this
temperature, you know, and I'm seeing the highest net protein balance at this temperature.
OK, So somebody who is, you know, down the line, oh, muscle protein synthesis is the only thing that
matters.
They're going to go, OK, so muscle protein synthesis should be highest at 28° ambient temperature.
I'm like, no, it's actually pretty much lowest.
But if you look at the muscle protein breakdown, that's even lower at that point.
So basically what happens is you start to go outside of the zone in which the chicken is most
comfortable and actually protein turnover increases.
You actually get protein turnover increasing outside our zone, but of course you end up with more
protein breakdown than you do protein synthesis when you when you push into those less comfortable
scenarios because it's a stressor.
So your glucocorticoid starts to create oxidative stress, which starts to create an increase in
protein breakdown relative to muscle protein synthesis.
So your turnover increases, but fundamentally you end up with net less net protein balance.
So it's really, really fascinating to look at some of this stuff and realize that you cannot simply
say, oh, more muscle brilliance indices, more hypertrophy.
That is absolutely not valid outside of a very small set of parameters which are, as I say, the
first day post straight train workout.
When you haven't got any environmental stressors or any other funniness going on, you know that it
just breaks the link between MPs and hypertrophy.
So there's a few implications of that.
Now, obviously there's, there's the most apparent one, which is OK, that makes it, I don't want to
say more difficult, but it does add a layer of complexity in terms of looking at some of the
literature and realizing or understanding what effect are we seeing when we're seeing MPs elevated
in longer time periods post workout, right.
And obviously that's where a lot of this conversation is centered is are we seeing this stimulus,
you know, persist 3 days later after the workout or not?
And obviously, we've done podcasts on that topic in the past, So it's probably not something we need
to particularly dig into more here.
And that's the most obvious kind of, I guess, application piece to this.
But then there's a muscle protein breakdown part, which has been largely neglected in this entire
conversation sort of up until I guess the last few weeks we've been talking about in the podcast.
And that's an interesting piece because it's potentially a little bit more modifiable, at least the
MPs stuff.
I think people understand how to be modify that, at least from a training perspective.
So you've given a couple of examples there and we've talked in the past podcasts about
hypercortiscemia being probably the big one nearly as far as muscle protein breakdown.
What do we, what do we do with that information?
What's what is that influence?
So we need to be conscious of things that are increasing cortisol for starters, I guess.
And you know, we've talked about chronic sleep, I guess sort of restriction or, or what are the
languages there, negative sleep sort of affecting that?
What else do people need to be aware of in terms of this MPB piece of the equation?
So excluding anabolic storage for a moment, this is largely about whether something is experienced
as a stressor.
So any stressor is going to produce that glucocorticoid response, which is going to produce an
oxidative stress effect inside the muscle fibers, which is going to lead to muscle protein breakdown
rates increasing.
So whether it's a life stress event or obviously insufficient sleep falls into that category,
whatever it may be is going to, you know, an excessive caloric restriction is one of those
stressors.
And like where you draw the line, people ask me all the time, it's like, you know, precisely how
many calories is excessive, how many calories, you know, being restricted is excessive.
And I'm like, well, it, it depends on how you experience it.
You know, So people love to have these arguments about well, oh, well, somebody who's got a higher
body fat percentage could have a higher deficit.
And I'm like, could they ask them how do they feel when they're doing it?
Because that's your metric.
That's your primary metrics.
Like if, if, if you're experienced, if you're entering into a calorie deficit and you feel
absolutely horrific, that's a pretty good indication that you are experiencing A stressor.
Because, you know, feelings are kind of how we kind of interact with the world.
So it's like if you're experiencing a really, really horrible time when you're going through a
calorie deficit, then you're probably stressed, you're probably experiencing A stressor, you've
probably got a glucocorticoid response going on.
So yeah, sure.
If somebody is, you know, at the higher end of the body fat percentage spectrum and they are using a
huge deficit and they're not feeling horrible, fantastic, that's great.
They're probably not losing muscle mass as a result.
I think people have got to get away from this idea that they can just go, oh, this person with this
percentage, they can do that.
And I'm like, no, it's not like that.
It's like, what is the experience for them?
You've absolutely got to do this from a psychological point of view because that is the reality.
It's like over the last couple of years I've managed to get people to understand that, you know, the
effort perception is the important factor and then we're dealing with a brain level phenomenon.
So ultimately, you know, your maximum tolerable perception of effort is what stops you from pushing
motive equipment any further.
OK.
I think people have now more or less got that.
This is the same thing.
We've got to move in that same direction with this.
It's like, you know, a calorie deficit.
It's not about the numbers on the page.
It's about what it feels like.
If it feels horrible, then yes, you have probably got a stressor.
You've probably got a glucocorticoid response.
If it doesn't feel horrible, you probably haven't.
So yeah, the person with, you know.
So the 30% body fat who wants to lose weight quickly may or may not be able to use a large calorie
deficit and still maintain muscle mass.
They've just got to try different calorie deficits until they figure out what they can get away with
without feeling really, really horrible in the process.
So I just want people to move away from this idea of saying, oh, it's got to be a number on a page
and this person could do this and this person can do that.
No, it doesn't work like that.
Now, the next piece of this, so if you're saying that ultimately this is coming down to this, I
guess net protein balance and what we're seeing with the combination of MPs and MPB, then
theoretically one could have lower levels of MPs, but actually see larger net growth if they've got
reduction or lower levels MPB.
So in that regard, obviously you've talked about things that are.
Going to just to kind of give you give you 2 examples where that will happen.
Yeah.
So somebody with lower daily physical activity levels will experience that.
So you could have somebody, two different people, one person is highly physically active and doing a
not great workout program and the other person is very, very sedentary and doing an amazing workout
program.
So somebody's doing like a classic, you know, every other day full body targeting loads of different
muscle regions, but in between that they're just sitting, playing video games.
The other person is, you know, maybe walking around all day, highly physically active job and then
doing like a body part split program.
The person who's literally, well, you got what you're going to see there is that your net protein
balance for the person who's playing video games and doing every other day workout is going to be
higher than the person who's doing the poor program with a lot of physical activity.
But turnover is going to be a lot higher than the person who's doing the higher levels of physical
activity.
The straightaway you would see that being the discrepancy there.
Same thing again would apply really pick two people, one who's more stressed than the other.
So you got a really stressed person with really bad sleep, you know, they would be experiencing a
much bigger protein, probably turnover and definitely a higher protein breakdown compared to the
person who's not so stressed.
So that would be two examples of exactly what you're describing there.
And in that second example, what's interesting is they could actually be doing, they could tackling
I guess that problem from the MPs standpoint and they could be focusing on you know, enhancing the
workouts, optimizing workouts, getting the highest sort of MPs post workout sort of spike possible.
But ultimately the the bottleneck to in a sense is going to be muscle protein breakdown.
Well, yeah, once you fix the workout plan, everything is just going to come down to lifestyle and
and what's being experienced.
Yeah.
So is there anything else that will modify muscle protein breakdown beyond taking away some of those
stresses?
Not that fall into my area of expertise, no.
I'm sure there probably are things, but that would be outside of my, I mean, maybe there are some
supplements that people can, you know, chip in with, but that is just not inside my area of
expertise.
It's not what I read.
Beyond anabolics, which you mentioned.
Before Beyond Anabolics, which I think is very very interesting in this context.
And so how much is muscle protein breakdown?
How much is that influencing the the rate of atrophy?
Is it influencing how quickly the atrophy is occurring or when it occurs?
Or what is it influencing from an atrophy's perspective?
So I mean, ultimately the net protein balance is the thing that affects the atrophy rate.
So you can have like higher or lower levels of MPs to MPB and it doesn't tell you anything in and of
itself.
It's like, what's the balance of the two coming out at?
Having said that, if you look at the group of people in the literature that lose muscle mass
fastest, it's people who are experiencing hypercortisolaemia, usually because of a traumatic injury.
So they're in bed rest.
So you're starting off with a pretty low level of MPs anyway, and then you dump in this
hypercortisolaemia and you get a massive increase in MPB that actually pushes the MPs back up again
a little bit.
But you starting from a low level.
So that's the group of people in the literature that use muscle mass fastest.
It's they lose muscle mass a lot faster than people who are just in bed rest without the injury in
place.
So assuming that we're seeing more MPBS than we are MPs and so we're going to see loss occur, then
if we push up that muscle protein breakdown, it's not that we're going to see loss occur like at a
quicker time point.
What we're going to see is just more loss occurs.
So it's not that someone does a training session, MPs is elevated and then with a high level of
muscle protein breakdown, they start seeing atrophy occur earlier.
It's simply when they start seeing atrophy occur.
Yeah, it would be a background effect.
It would be a background effect, Yeah.
Yeah.
So if we look as I say, if we look at the traumatic injury stuff and just just as an aside before I
answer the the question you posed, I know that some people will say that the muscle protein
breakdown rates being elevated in traumatic injury are doing damage repair and therefore we can
ignore them.
No, you can't because you're actually measuring muscle loss as well.
So if you have two groups of people, one group is just in bed and experiencing muscle loss because
of immobilization induced reductions in MPs, you can compare the rate to muscle loss in that group
with another group that has experienced A traumatic injury or experimental hypercortisolamia.
You'll get the same answer.
And the second group, which is experienced in the cortisol induced effects of muscle protein
breakdown, will lose whole body muscle mass faster than the other groups.
It's got nothing to do with breakdown rates being elevated due to muscle damage repair, which is
definitely happening, but that's not what we're talking about here.
We're talking about whole body muscle loss being faster in that second group.
So yeah, it's it's an absolute thing, but it would be a background effect.
So you really would be happening all the time.
So you would go into your workout with a level of MPB that was already higher and that would then
just be suppressing the impact of your MPs elevation in the 24 hours post workout.
So you would end up with a smaller post workout stimulus net as a result of your background MPB
being higher.
So there would actually be a crossover period where at a certain point that NPS when it's coming
back down, it's going to the I guess the net.
Also at that point, probably earlier point, earlier than it would, Yes, yes it would.
Yeah.
So that could actually influence how long that stimulus period was for an individual.
Yeah.
So you could argue that somebody who is experiencing that elevation in MPB might be better off doing
kind of daily workouts that are really, really kind of minimally damaging in order to try and
maximally retain muscle mass.
Which is the conversation we had last week.
Whether they be whether they be open to that is a separate question, because if your MP, if your if
your glucocorticol response is that high, you're probably not open to those kind of conversations.
So where does anabolics land us?
You know, ultimately that's where I'm, what I'm trying to get at here in terms of, well, if we're
influencing this muscle protein breakdown, what impact is that having on atrophy?
So it's changing that crossover period we've just identified there.
Now, to what magnitude is doing that?
You know where we're talking a matter of a few hours.
Like how long might that magnitude be or that difference be?
Let's back up and just kind of provide the context for people, you know, with anabolics.
So you and I have been talking about how anabolics affect and the strengthening process for quite a
while now.
And obviously, there's a really pivotal study that you actually dug out at the beginning.
And I kind of like it really changed the way I afford to anabolics.
We've basically had, I think it was a rabbit model and they had obviously a systemic effect from the
anabolics.
But what they did was they immobilized 1 limb and not the other limb.
And so the really cool thing about that model is that you get growth happening across the whole body
due to the anabolic steroid effect, but the immobilization removes all the mechanical mechanical
tension stimulus from one of the limbs.
Now one way of thinking about anabolics is that antibiotics completely remove any possibility for a
atrophy effect to happen.
So if you believe that, which I once did, if you believe that, then this study doesn't make any
sense because what happened was that the immobilized limb grew slower than the non immobilized limb
and that implied that that it was actually losing muscle mass due to the absence of mechanical
tension stimulus.
Well, you can't do that if you have removed any, you know, kind of impact of atrophy as a result of
taking the anabolic steroid.
So ultimately that rabbit study that that rabbit model was really influential in understanding how
we see anabolic steroids and how they work.
They're actually a parallel track.
I think where we got to is that they're a parallel track to mechanical tensions to miss from
exercise and you basically just treat them as two separate things and they add on top of each other.
So, but I think where we're getting to now, the more time we spend looking at most protein breakdown
and the effects of anabolics on that is that that previous model that we described only applies when
you're modifying MPs and not modifying MPB.
So if you look at that rabbit model, it's an immobilization model.
So you don't have an MPB increase really.
You have a big drop in MPs as a result of immobilization.
So your anabolic steroid doesn't fix all of that because it's an MPs issue that is additive.
You either you've got a little bit of MPs from the exercise, you got a little bit of MPs from the
anabolics.
Like we see in the human studies when they do a human study with one group takes anabolics, one
group takes anabolics and the strength training and the third group just does strength training.
And you basically get, you know, the anabolics group and the strength training group get the same
amount of muscle mass increases and the combined group get double the amount of strength.
So they're literally just additive.
So the human, it does sort of sit really well with the animal model data in this respect, as long as
you're only talking about NPS or your models are only dependent on changes in NPS.
I should say, if we now look at things where the models are being changed by glucocorticoid
responses, then I think things are going to be slightly different because anabolics have a very
unique effect in so far as they actually start to act antagonistically on glucocorticoids.
So, and that's something that exercise can't do.
So if you have a scenario where you would start to apply an anabolic in a environment where you know
somebody was, you know, and they've done this in traumatic injury studies as well, by the way, you
can look at that scenario and it actually starts to have a really pronounced effect on the most
protein breakdown.
So I think what we would start to have to, we'd have to modify our model now to say anabolics
probably have really, we've said this actually in the calorie restriction podcast, we did, we said
this in the sleep restriction.
People who are using anabolics, even if it's only TRT, are going to find that they just don't
experience the negative issues of sleep restriction or calorie restriction like people who are not
using those compounds.
Because essentially what happens is the the anabolic steroid acts as an antagonist against the
glucocord and stops it from having the negative effect on protein breakdown.
So they just don't, it just doesn't resonate them with them.
They look at this and go, that's just not happening.
I'm like, no, no, I'm sure it's not, but it is for everybody else.
So I think we've got to modify the way we think about these things and say, yeah, in the normal
strength training scenario where you've got no major stressors, no sleep restriction, no calorie
restriction, then yeah, you can literally just look at this as an MPs problem.
And the AAS and the strength training are just going to have two MPs modifying effects, and they're
just going to be additive.
And that's the simple way of viewing it.
And that's totally valid.
When you then shift into territory of talking about scenarios where you've got severe calorie
deficit or sleep loss or a stressor or anything like that, now the anabolic is going to be
disproportionately more powerful compared to anything else you can do because it is going to stop
that MPB from increasing in a way that strength training can't do.
Yeah, that's interesting.
So does that influence and I don't think it does, but does it change anything in terms of what we've
been talking about how we would program for someone on anabolics Ultimately in the past you said,
well, it doesn't really change.
You would program a good program for someone who's not on Anabolics would be a good program for
someone who is on Anabolics.
Does that influence any of those parameters?
I think it means that you've got, there are far fewer things to worry about in a, in a competition
prep period or a dieting period.
So, you know, bodybuilders who are in competition prep or people who are dieting down, you know,
they're just not going to need to worry so much about the effects of stressors, the effects of sleep
loss, You know, anything like that is just not going to hit them anywhere near.
It's like this, this, this solves the problem of why we were seeing some weirdnesses with anabolics
in dieting situations before and they didn't quite stack up with with how we were expecting them to
behave.
They have this disproportionately powerful effect, I think in those dieting periods where you just
don't get that glucocorticoid response that you would do in somebody who's not using them.
And I think really that is probably arguably the single biggest effect that body rules are getting
out of them in the short term.
It's just, you know, you can just completely avoid all of that stress or impact completely.
So really I would say from a strength training point of view, it probably means that you can yeah,
you you can not, you can basically not modify your training program to make it less stressful if you
want to do that.
So let's say you've got a strength training program that you're using in the offseason and it's hard
work and you want to carry on using that in your competition prep period.
Then from a natural bodybuilding point of view, I would counsel you to bring the workout volumes
down to minimal levels.
Be like, you know, just do single sets and maybe leave a Rep and reserve here or there.
The person using Alabolics can probably push the boundaries and make themselves feel pretty horrible
and get away with it.
I mean, that's the only kind of minor thing that I would say would probably be relevant here.
Yeah.
Would it influence when we talked about dieting or you know, insufficient sleep and any of these
hyperchloroscelemic models, the conversation came up about, well, you could look at training every
day, but are you going to be limited by your recoverability in those instances in a situation where
there is where there would normally be hypercortisol and the anabolics and mitigating that effect,
potentially they're going to mitigate some of that recovery negative impact there as well then.
So they they would potentially be enhancing recovery in a higher stress situation, no?
Yeah.
So, yeah.
So what we tend to see with with anabolics is, and I know that in the past, I've said, I don't think
anabolics accelerate muscle repair.
I think they actually probably do.
I don't think it's a huge effect, but I think they probably do.
So yeah, I think that you probably get a slightly faster.
But again, what we're talking about here is 2 separate things.
If you're comparing, if you're comparing literally somebody with no stress sores in a calorie
balance state and that you've got two groups of people who qualify for that description and one of
the groups takes anabolic steroids, I think they're going to experience muscle damage repair at a
slightly faster rate than the group that is not taking anabolic sores.
I don't think it's going to be massive, but I think it will be there.
In contrast, if you now transport those two groups and say we're now in severe calorie deficits,
we've got stress sores going on, then the problem with glucocort cause is they massively suppress
the inflammation response in the post workout period, which is a major component to the post workout
repair process.
The anabolic is going to stop that happening.
So I would argue that when we're talking about repair post workout happening, the effect is going to
be a lot bigger when you're comparing people who are in, you know, severe calorie restriction and
maybe even stressful scenarios than if you're just comparing 2 groups of people in, you know,
unstressed calorie balance scenarios.
So again, disproportionately beneficial effects from the point of view of anabolics when you're
talking about an antagonist effect normally do go cortical.
So I guess essentially where you're landing there is that someone on anabolics ultimately doesn't
need to, and you said this before, adjust their training program around higher cortisol situations
because?
They're not experiencing that.
Yeah.
That someone who's natural, that's going to be something.
Again, a huge number of things you can do and modify that.
But there are a couple of considerations that one might have that could mitigate some of that and
they're just simply not going to be that relevant to someone who's enhanced.
Yeah, exactly, Exactly.
So I think they can kind of just kind of carry on doing what they were doing in the offseason.
And largely it's going to take care of itself.
It does not going to modify very much.
In contrast, the person who is not doing that person who's remaining natural is going to find they,
they, they hit the hard part of the calorie deficit where you know, it's starting to be a stressor
and the wheels just come off.
You know, absolutely the wheels just come off because they can't recover in time and muscle mass is
is being lost and they can't stop it being lost.
And it's really, really difficult.
So that's when you need to start modifying stuff, you know, reducing the volume of the workout,
maybe thinking about increasing the frequency if you can, and obviously mitigating stressors as hard
as you possibly can in all directions.
That's where the hard work is.
I think really the antibiotics are making that all very, very easy for people who.
Used to, there's just more moving parts of the natural.
Totally, totally.
If there was a lot there, is there anything else that you wanted to mention or cover as far as
MPSMPB is concerned?
No, I, I just wanted to give people some of the background for understanding and context for
understanding why when you've got people who are saying that MPs elevations always mean hypertrophy
is happening or at least atrophy is being prevented, that is 100% not true.
And it's really easy to prove it's not true by just simply reading a bunch of, you know, different
studies and areas of research that have been done slightly outside of the immediate obvious
hypertrophy area.
And also I've explained why the hypertrophy researchers have ended up making the error that they've
made error of assumption that they've made, which is that they can simply use this metric all the
time.
And it means that all the time.
And it doesn't.
So, you know, hopefully if, if, if we can, if people can understand that, then that very common
error will stop happening.
We did our toes and some interesting anabolic stuff and it is a conversation we're going to continue
in the the near future.
Everyone stay tuned for that because I know it's going to be an interesting conversation.
So as always, thank you guys for joining us.
We do appreciate it, and we hope you'll join us again next week for another episode.