Episode: 028 How does dieting affect hypertrophy?
URL: https://open.spotify.com/episode/4u6AtAvWOvGkzLPpE4Wsvc
Published: 2025-11-30
================================================================================

Welcome back everyone to another episode of Hypertrophy, past and present.
Thank you for joining us as always.
Chris, how are you doing today?
I'm doing very well.
Thanks, Jake.
Good to hear.
So we introduced Dolphin era plans last week and I've had some interesting feedback from people.
A few people were actually shocked at how different the plans were, which I don't know why they were
so shocked because we still see plans like that today quite commonly online.
But I guess it is interesting to see that stark contrast, especially when it's a workout that's
performed by the same person just over, you know, sort of pre enhancement and and post enhancement.
So that was that was the first time we've compared those.
So if you missed last week's episode, go back and have a look and you can see an example, an early
example of how routines changed in the early Anabolics period.
Now we will be introducing more plans like that, but I wanted to jump back to a silly real plan this
week and we're jumping back to Clancy Clarence Ross, who we have discussed in the past.
So Mr. America, Mr. Universe winner.
Now Clancy, we, we introduced Clancy early on because he actually did some interesting things.
He was one of the first bodybuilders to use a split routine like an upper lower.
So what he would do is he actually used his full body and he split it into up lower in the same day.
Now, he didn't do that all the time.
He did that before competition and he did some some interesting things before competition.
We're going to talk about another interesting type of routine he did today before competitions.
But he's, he's an interesting character because he started when single sets were kind of the only
way of doing things.
And so he actually bridged that period of starting out just doing single sets and then experimenting
with multi sets.
And then he actually became a huge proponent of the multi set system, which is usually only like two
or three sets per exercise.
It wasn't anything like what we see today, but he actually, you know, won some of his competitions
using a single set system, won some of his competitions using two or three sets per exercise.
And it's again, just interesting to see that development, development.
They have the same lifter and how they responded to slightly different routines and, you know,
tweaking their routine over time.
So the routine we're gonna talk about today, I'll be honest, these there's a lot that I love about
this silly era, obviously.
And we talk about that each week.
And then there's some things I look at and I made this comment a while ago that sometimes I see
stuff that they were doing and at the time I think to myself, why?
Like why?
What were they thinking?
I didn't get it.
And sometimes over time, it daunts me.
Oh, that's why they did that.
And I'll be honest, this is one of those things that hasn't dawned on me yet and I still don't
understand why they did this.
There's a little bit that we'll discuss as you, you know, maybe why, but it's I still don't really
understand the full rationale behind it.
So it is something that I've sort of held off on presenting to you guys, but I figure it's relevant
to what we're talking about today.
So let's jump in and give you guys perhaps an example of something that I think maybe I wouldn't be
emulating in my own plans today.
So again, Clancy Ross, this is 1945.
This is before his competition.
And this is what they would call a, a definition routine or sometimes they call it a reducing
routine.
It's basically a weight loss routine.
Now, bearing in mind this is the the bit of grace I will give Clancy at this point in time is that
that we're using these routines to get into condition for the show.
So I understand this is not, you know, the, the purpose of this is not hypertrophy, OK?
So we need to understand that they weren't doing a lot of cardio, you know, they weren't like they
didn't have sort of other methods that were using for conditioning.
They're kind of using their gym routines for conditioning.
So from that standpoint, OK, we can, you know, cut them a bit of slack, but I'll just present the
routine to you guys and then I'll let you guys judge.
So actually, there's, there's one thing I think he did very well.
So what he D does say is routine was the same, the same exercises as his, I'm gonna call it a hyper
routine.
It was just his, his normal routine.
Yeah.
So he hasn't gone in and suddenly changed up all of his exercises.
He's kept the exercises the same.
He's changed the format, which I'll talk about in a moment.
But the exercises we have.
And again, this is, you know, Monday, Wednesday, Friday or 3 * A week was a standing overhead
barbell press, a barbell curl, a barbell upright row, a barbell bench, an incline bench, a deadlift,
A squat, a leg press, and then a calf raise.
So a lot of multi joint exercises here.
And I will mention that there was a bit of, I don't want to say contention, but there was some, you
know, competing beliefs here as to do you do more multi joints or do you do more single joint
exercises leading up to comp.
And there were certainly somebodybuilders like Rage who did kind of push a little bit more towards
more single joint exercises.
But this is the way Clancy was doing it and he was doing three sets of his bit of 15 to 20
repetitions for each of these exercises.
And he also shortened his rest periods between the sets compared to what he was normally doing.
So short dress periods, 15 to 20 repetitions, multi joint, big exercises, big lifts.
And he did this, I think he did this for about a month, I will just say.
So this isn't something he was doing for, you know, six months or a year or whatever.
It was just in there, those sort of few weeks leading up to the comp.
Chris, what have you?
What have you got to make of that?
Well, I think obviously the point that you lead with is the most important one to emphasize, which
is that he's keeping the same exercises in his program when he's going from his standard routine to
his, you know, pre competition routine.
You know, and that's so important because what we're saying there is that he's ensuring that any
gains that he's achieved in the offseason are hopefully going to be carried over or not necessarily
offseason because he's literally describing like just a few weeks before the competition.
You know, all the gains attitude up to that point in the pre, uh, you know, kind of competition
preparation phase.
You know, he's now got to the level where he's going to probably not gain anymore muscle mass.
He's just going to try and keep as much as he's got and he's at least ensuring that there is, uh,
that correspondence between the fibres that have been activated previously to the fibres that's
being activated in that last couple of weeks.
Switching exercise is the worst thing you can possibly do.
I think really in that and that kind of situation because you're basically not going to gain
anything new from the fibres that you might be training that are different because you're probably
not going to access much of them.
And we're going to talk about some of the variables go into that in terms of not just in terms of
activating and loading, but you may not be able to stimulate the hypertrophy anyway even if you are
activating and loading.
But we'll get on to that later on.
But yeah, obviously potentially, you know, kind of that any discrepancy between the exercises before
and after starting the diet probably not going to be is not going to be a very good idea.
I mean, all the other stuff that I could say probably said before when we talked about this exact
same routine, you know, I don't see a lot of, you know, kind of back exercises in there.
So I'm obviously pleased to see the deadlift in there, which is something we don't see because I I
just can't get my head around it.
It's like, why would you not pick a barbell up off the ground?
You know, it's the easiest possible exercise you can do with a barbell.
So why isn't it in the programmes of, of most of these golden, sorry, silver era lifts?
My brain is now in golden era, but you know, why?
Why isn't it in the in the, in the routines?
So, but yeah, I mean comments on the exact exercise as probably already done.
But yeah, I think the important thing is that, you know, we're seeing that continued continuity
between the, you know, the pre diet and post diet exercise selection.
Obviously I'm in the same kind of on the same page as you as regards the sets reps, that kind of
thing.
I don't see any value in shifting to higher reps you know for that phase.
It makes no real sense to all from a fatigue point of view, whether it's inter workout or post
workout really.
If he were able to recover from this, I mean, most of that I'm looking at it and you know, most of
it would have been more or less recoverable.
Maybe you could say chest, he's hitting it with a barbell, a flat bench and an incline bench as
well.
So you might go into some issues there.
But if that weren't an issue, those high repetition sets, at least at first set, he should be.
That first set should be stimulating as much as possible in the sense of maintaining what he's
built, right.
So he's not losing a whole lot by doing the high repetitions because he's still kind of getting that
first set stimulus anyway.
It's not.
It's just not really giving him anything extra.
Yeah.
Well, I think the issue is the recoverability side and and we'll touch on that when we move into the
Physiology part of today's podcast.
But you know, you're right, assuming that, assuming that he is recovering from one workout to the
next, which I think is a pretty big assumption.
You know, if that's the case, then yeah, you know, sort of 15 Rep Max as you're getting close to a
similar level of recruitment that you would do with a kind of a moderate load, you know, 8 to 10
maybe it's not going to be massively, massively different.
So yeah, in terms of the stimulus.
So if you're assuming that there's no hypertrophy possible really in that final few weeks, which is
probably a fair assumption actually, then the reality is that if recovery is happening, there's
probably not too much to worry about in terms of of the of the programme.
There are absolutely worst programmes out there, I'll give you that.
But I think the the assumption that he's able to recover from that type of work out with that Rep
range in that caloric restricted state, I think is is a little bit of a, a stretch.
Yeah, that would be the variable.
And I don't know how how hard he would have been dieting.
But I guess what I find interesting while I look at this and I think, oh man, this is not a plan I
would like to do or that, you know, I would give clients given the parameters that he was sort of
following here of, you know, trying to hopefully maintain as much muscle as possible that he built
and not let's say obviously everyone had access to Cardi.
You could just go outside.
Yeah.
But you know, let's say that for whatever reason, I was not actually on the table because I just
weren't thinking about it.
If he was using this workout to burn, earn as much energy as possible for the perps of fat loss and
to try to maintain as much as he had.
Ultimately, this is kind of something I guess you would maybe lean towards.
Like, again, I'm not trying to justify it, but if you're pushing it like if this were recoverable,
OK, this is achieving the best of both worlds, but not doing either one, well, you know what I mean?
So it's like, OK.
I know he's so.
Thinking I can kind of see what logic led him to this point, yeah.
I mean, ultimately, you know, you would immediately make your life 10 times easier by doing a single
set of moderate loads, you know, kind of eight to 10 reps and then going for a long walk.
Exactly, exactly, but if that just wasn't on the table, I can you know, I can see why though.
Maybe trying to burn energy in the gym but I.
Just just take a take a bottle of water, go for a nice long walk and enjoy.
Enjoy the nice weather.
So hopefully we'll talk about some potentially maybe more productive ways of achieving fat loss or
at least things to be aware of in.
But you know, just to kind of before we move on, just like go coming back to this routine, you know,
like, yes, we can be very critical about it.
But you're right.
You know, fundamentally, you know, we're still talking about a routine which is, you know, full body
three times a week with, you know, sort of up to three sets per exercise.
And you know, OK, I'm being critical about the recoverability, but on paper it's not horribly
outside the zone of recoverable.
You know, recoverable is kind of three sets of moderate load, which is up to 15 Rep Max, and he's
just above that.
You know, you could equally say the same about somebody who's doing 4 sets of maybe heavier loads,
you know, sort of bottom end of the moderately heavy load, like 6-7.
You know, if they're doing 4 sets of maybe 6-7 Rep Max, you know, that's probably the same territory
as doing three sets of, you know, 15 to 20.
So the reality is it's not horrible.
You're right, it's not horrible and it is still better than 90% of what we see in the bodybuilding,
you know, kind of mainstream part of the bodybuilding community today, you know, So, you know, yes,
we're being critical about it, but we're being critical from a very exacting position.
It's not horrible.
I don't want people to run away with the idea that I'm being, you know, saying that this is, even
though it's a silver era program, it's not going to work.
It isn't horrible.
It's still better than most of what we're going to, most of what we're going to see today.
Yeah, and the exercise selection like you said, we don't have chin UPS.
We the deadlift maybe could have done a slightly better hip hinge, but and you know, I guess
triceps, long heads not going to get much work in what he's got there.
But apart from that, like it's a fairly decent exercise selection.
He's just using a barbell.
You know, there's, there's certainly a lot more he could do worse here.
It's he's just, I feel like he's just trying to achieve too much with one tool.
He's just not using other tools.
Yeah, sure.
And again, we don't know why that might have been the case.
I mean, practical considerations, you know, it's like, but yeah, I just wanted to, I didn't want to
finish talking about that part of today's podcast without emphasising that, you know, any criticisms
I have are being made from a position of extreme, you know, kind of very exacting mindset.
They're not being made from a kind of looking at this in the, in the spectrum of all the
possibilities that I see out there.
It's absolutely up in the top, in the top 10% of what's what's out there, I mean.
Really, Gosh, I mean, goodness, the the fat loss programs I was taught to do as APT and you know,
I'm not even talking about like, you know, men's health magazine type ones of bodybuilding account.
I'm talking about like have been passed out to me by world known leading coaches and those fat loss
programs are horrendous compared to something like this so.
It's quite amazing when, when you kind of get exposed to some of the really crazy stuff because I
made the error of, of asking my Co host on the other podcast that I, I do high performance
Physiology.
I asked, I asked Rob to start sending me, you know, all the silly things that he sees specifically
related to the topics that we were going to kind of talk about.
So I said, Tim, you know, send me some silly stuff that you see regarding, you know, whatever it
might be eccentric training or, you know, kind of vertical jumping or what have you.
And my goodness, there's, there's some absolute insanity out there and people are making all kinds
of weird stuff up.
I think this is the reason why people they, they, they kind of arrive on my social media and they
start asking me these questions and I'm like, no, that's not how this works.
It works like this.
And they're like, Oh yes, but these people said it works like that.
And I'm like, I'm sorry that you, that you, you were listening to them, but that's just absolutely
not how it works.
And I think we've, we're kind of in this strange place where people kind of they're, they look at
your numbers on social media and go, oh, well, this person had three million followers, you've only
got 150,000.
Therefore, they're more likely to be correct.
And like, if you think, if you think like that, you're going to get yourself into all kinds of
trouble.
You know, that's, that's just not how it works.
But you know, anyway, that could be an entire discussion in and of itself.
But let's, let's carry on.
Well, you know what I do?
I don't want to make one comment on that, on what you just said.
You know, Rob, sending you some stuff that people are doing poorly.
And I'll expand this briefly on the kind of what we were taught to do.
And this is stuff because I would say if I look at the fat loss programs we were taught, there was
there was one that was like, OK, and that would be German body compensation.
I don't know if you've been, if you've been exposed to German body compensation training.
I don't know, like this came largely out of Charles Poliquin.
I'm sure there was maybe people before Charles who were using it.
I'm not sure.
But what I liked about it, it was for fat loss is it was full body now and it would use like you'd
sort of pair exercise, you'd pair an upper body exercise with lower body exercise.
I deal with blood shunting.
It would increase energy expenditure supposedly.
But so, so I look at that, I'm like, oh, full body, OK, that's good.
Because a lot of the time, you know, a lot of the programmes I've seen in, in contemporary times and
not full body, but that would do like 5 sets.
And so, you know, I'm looking at like actually plans that have been talked about are used in modern
times.
And the one bit they got well is a bit that people like Clancy got well.
And then the bit that they that Clancy got I guess maybe, you know, was was questionable, was still
better than what I'm seeing done today.
You know, we were doing 5 sets of 1520 repetitions, same as what Clancy was doing.
So yeah, All in all, actually this was probably not that bad compared to a lot of what we would be
exposed to today.
Incidentally, I was just laughing as you were describing that because incidentally, if you, if you
want to make yourself feel really, really miserable in the gym, then do a, do a high Rep upper body
multi joint lift and then do a high Rep lower body multi joint lift relatively, you know, superseted
or relatively close together.
And that is one of the most unpleasant experiences that you can do.
I think in the gym.
It's, it's absolutely the, the metabolic demand is just off the charts.
It's I'm not saying that it has any useful adaptations that result, but it's certainly a way to feel
pretty horrible.
No, I've vomited multiple times doing these workouts.
I.
Can imagine, I can imagine.
It's, it's really, really, really nasty experience.
I think I did it once and vowed never to do it again.
It was, yeah, it was definitely an experience.
So anyway, yeah, there's there's there's some weird, weird stuff out there.
But ultimately, yeah, from my perspective, you know, there's, there's there's a lot of strange stuff
out there.
What we see in the Silver era, even when it's bad, it's still good.
Yeah, pretty much.
Yeah.
OK, So what are we, where are we going now?
What are we talking about?
So we, we just saw your program that you brought to us about pre competition strength training
routines.
And what I'd like to talk about today is just a, a kind of an overview of what's going on during
caloric extriction as regards muscle mass is concerned.
Now, the reason I want to talk about this is because I think that from my perspective, which is kind
of the sort of the muscle Physiology perspective or the neuromuscular Physiology perspective, when I
look at the way that this topic is treated, it tends to be kind of driven from the nutrition point
of view.
People kind of come to or nutrition and body composition point of view.
So people come to the topic and they're thinking about systemic Physiology, whole body Physiology.
They're not thinking so much about what's going on with the muscle itself.
So what I want to do is kind of say, let me present an alternative way of thinking about this or a
complementary, not alternative, complementary way of thinking about this, which will help you or
help the listener to just, you know, bring in a lot more muscle Physiology into their kind of
thought processes when it comes to dieting.
And, and really it's about muscle mass maintenance.
It's not about fat loss particularly or at all.
It's about muscle mass maintenance and how that is going on or how that is being affected.
By the decisions that we're making, and I'll walk, I'll walk through and explain how it works.
So basically what we can see in the literature is that we've got broadly 2 things to think about.
We've got the effects of caloric restriction on our ability to, you know, kind of sort of create a
workout stimulus and obviously we've got what's going on outside of that workout situation.
You can divide that into two kind of pieces.
You've got the recovery process, but then you've also got the potential for atrophy to happen.
So we've got the same things to think about that we have in any strength training program.
We're just going to say, well, how is caloric extraction affecting any of these three pieces now?
You know, straight away, you know, when we think about workouts themselves, you can kind of go,
well, you know, am I less motivated because I'm hungry?
Am I feeling lethargic and tired and all those things?
So you're going to kind of instinctively, you know, expect there to be a reduction in MOTI
recruitment because of the motivation reduction.
So straight away we're kind of aware of that.
But of course, you know, there's ways of mitigating that.
You can kind of bring in, you know, sort of a whole list of different things that will increase
motivation, increase recruitment.
Yeah, I think most people are aware of that problem instinctively or just kind of, you know, they've
figured it out and they're kind of like, well, OK, we're going to need to take steps to address
that.
But it's interesting just to be aware that one of the factors that drives that low motivation is a
reduction in, you know, the stores of carbohydrate that we are holding.
So muscle glycogen, blood glucose, those kind of things.
As those drop, we obviously are going to experience that reduction in, you know, kind of or
experience fatiguing sensations that contribute to our inability to hit maximum levels of
recruitment.
So there's not, it's not just about saying, oh, well, when I'm dieting, I feel tired.
It's about, you know, there are specific reasons or at least one very good reason why we know that
might happen.
And of course, you know, that then also kind of gives us a clue about what might be happening in the
post workout period.
Because of course, you know, when you have low glycogen, you're going to get accelerated calcium
unrelated fatigue and that's going to create problems for you, you in the post workout recovery
period.
So kind of already started to piece this together as a model.
So essentially, you know, we've just talked a little bit there about how, you know, chlorostriction
might affect our ability to perform in a workout.
We've also got issues going on related to the, you know, workout stimulus and the atrophy periods.
And that really comes in the form of chlorostriction suppressing muscle protein synthesis rates.
So this is a pretty well described phenomenon.
A lot of the hypertroid researchers have looked at this and they've come back with answers broadly
along the lines that, you know, a strength training stimulus can rescue what they say rescue muscle
protein synthesis rates.
So essentially you are coming to work out from a period of rest and you had a suppressed level of
muscle protein synthesis compared to you if you were not in caloric restriction.
And then you do a strengthening workout and it bumps you back up to your, you know, and beyond your
kind of original levels.
So generally speaking, you're going to see that strength training is doing something pretty useful
to prevent that particular problem from happening.
But of course, you know, it's never going to get to levels that it would be if you weren't in that
suppressed level because it's not, you know, kind of jumping you up to massive levels, but it's kind
of just moving you same kind of level from baseline as it would could have done in a calorie balance
state.
So but we're also aware that reduced muscle protein synthesis is going to slow down recovery post
workout.
So not only are we going to get a problem from the extra calcium I related fatigue caused by low
glycogen levels, we're also going to get a slower rate of recovery from a muscle protein synthesis
kind of point of view.
So just pause there a moment and just kind of come back to the program that you brought to us today.
And I made the comment and I don't necessarily think that in the context of a dieting situation, we
would expect recoverable volumes to be, you know, quite as high as they are in, in calorie balance.
It's because of this reason.
It's because we're getting lower muscle protein synthesis and muscle protein is used to repair
muscle damage.
And also we've got more calcium iolative fatigue for the same workout because we're essentially, you
know, triggering an accelerated rate of excitation contraction coupling failure, especially in
situations where we are in caloric restrictions.
So I think what that for me sort of starts to give us some ideas about structuring strength training
workouts when we're in caloric restriction.
I'm looking at the programs that I'm, you know, kind of writing for people who are not in calorie
restriction, then I'm converting them into programs that are suitable for the dieting phase.
And I'm going, I'm expecting recoverabilities now to be lower.
I'm expecting to get a have a problem with Mote unit recruitment during the workout.
So what can I do in the workout that's going to increase Mote unit recruitment?
What can I do, you know, in the post workout period or for the post workout period to avoid, you
know, triggering so much muscle damage And incidentally, reducing volume is a cool way of addressing
both of those things as we've told before.
I mean, one of my favorite stories for people is to kind of get them thinking about how their
workout experience relates to Physiology.
I say to them, if you go in and do you know if you're normally doing three sets of every exercise
and you go in and do three sets, My favorite example is the seated hamstring curl.
I know for a fact that if I go and do three sets of hamstring curls, seated hamstring curls, I can
kind of hit a certain set of numbers with a certain weight.
If I only allow myself to do a single set, I will absolutely beat my first set number of the three
set protocol by at least one Rep.
You know, it's like, I know that's going to happen and it's just because your brain knows that it's
got more work to do and so it creates a perception of effort associated with your future
expectations.
So if I'm now looking at that and I know that I've got a recoverability problem and I've also got an
OT recruitment problem, I can actually address both those problems by dropping from three sets to 1.
So you mentioned the glycogen and that affecting so low muscle glycogen affecting muscle damage.
Now we talked a few weeks ago about carbohydrate rinsing and having some kind of like intra workout
carb.
So someone might be listening and thinking kind of just do that.
That's not going to influence massive glycogen or blood glucose.
So that's not a strategy someone could use, is it?
So the pre pre workout carbohydrate mouth rinsing is going to fix, not fix but it's going to move
you in the direction of addressing super spinal CNSD.
So it's going to affect the motivation problem during the workout.
I think carbohydrate mouth rinsing gets you halfway there because it it starts to address the motor
recruitment deficit that you might be experiencing because it's just going to make you feel a bit
better briefly while you do the workout.
I mean, that's the layman's version of it, but it's not going to address the post workout fatigue
issue.
There's some really nice data in actually cross country running.
In fact they get because it does actually produce pretty decent amount of muscle damage in the lower
body.
They give you a quite intense kind of maybe hour, hour and a half run and they come back and
generally speaking they've got a neuromuscular fatigue component associated with calcium and
accumulation.
It's their impact phases and their stretch activated line channels.
If you give those athletes A carbohydrate drink before they run, they actually experience a lot less
damage post run.
And it's because they're not in that kind of glycogen depleted state in any way, shape or form
during the during the actual run itself.
In in contrast, if you just give them water, they do experience that that bigger damage response.
So there's not much data in that in the strength training side of things.
But since post work appetite works the same way irrespective of, you know, the flavour of exercise
that you're working with, it kind of gives us a pretty strong hint that you know, that that pre
workout carbohydrate is actually a really interesting thing, you know, an interest.
I mean like from a nutritional point of view.
Again, this is the point I'm making when I, when I say that I think that a lot of the the
discussions around dieting, body composition and you know, muscle mass retention during a diet and
pre competition with bodybuilding, a lot of it is driven from the nutritional body composition
viewpoint.
What I'm trying to do here is get people to go, OK, but how does this look from a muscle Physiology
point of view on your muscular Physiology point of view?
Because a lot of those guys will tell you, you know, just make sure you get your post workout, you
know, protein and that'll you know, and I'm not denying that.
And that will, you know, mention that later on, although it's not as big an effect as people think,
you know, that absolutely does help.
But pre workout carb is actually going to give you something a little interesting that you know is
probably not usually discussed and it's doing that by reducing the incidence of calcium I'm relative
to.
So in the first time trade example, how long before the event are they consuming the carbohydrates?
I think, I think it varies.
I think it varies.
I mean, that's, that's that's something that I'm not, I'm not knowledgeable enough about how
systemic Physiology works for absorption rates and that kind of thing.
But you know, I would imagine that, you know, if, if, if people want to give themselves the best
possible, you know, kind of chance of it getting full absorption, they're probably not going to want
to swing it on the way to the gym.
You know, you might want to give it a bit of lead time to get it to the point where it's capable of
contributing to, you know, the internal processes.
So honestly, I'd probably give it a couple of hours.
I wouldn't want to risk leaving it till just before I walked in the gym.
Whereas from a carbohydrate mouth rinsing point of view, you can obviously.
Because you would want to do both, you would.
You would want to have pre work 8 carbs an hour, 2 hours before and then you would want to have some
intra workout or before you lift so closer to the actual exercise itself.
Yeah, bearing in mind that if you didn't want to ingest those as calories, you wouldn't have to
because it's not actually going to do anything for you at that point.
Now you also mentioned reduction in MPs.
Is there any influence on macronutrient ratio that would influence that?
So if someone says, OK, I'm dieting now, I'm just going to push my protein up super, super the high
to mitigate that.
Is it just the simple fact of being in a deficit that's going to have that negative impact on MPs?
So, so this is an interesting one.
The the shape of the So this requires a little bit of context.
So the shape of the literature that we've got at the moment as regards muscle mass retention, MPs,
muscle breeding breakdown, all that kind of stuff, the shape of the literature is currently a little
bit messy.
It's, and the reason it's messy is because we see a very distinctive difference between when caloric
restriction is perceived as a stressor, when it's not.
And when you start to try and piece together the data that we've got in people, in animals, in
various different models of research, they aren't always taking that into account.
They, they, they're like, they're investigating calorie restriction and they're not necessarily
recognizing that there is a very big difference between when calorie restriction is perceived as a
stressor and when it's not.
And so you kind of get these different results and you, when you, when you're looking at this from a
muscle Physiology point of view, you instinctively will start to try and allocate studies to one of
those two categories and you'll be like, does this fit into that category or does it fit into the
other category?
So let me, let me kind of just walk through that framework and then I'll come back to the, to the
question about, you know, dietary protein.
So essentially, when we look at, when we look at the, the, the two scenarios, caloric restriction in
a non stress state.
So if we say that the caloric restriction is not behaving as a stressor, in that scenario, what we
see generally is just a suppression of muscle protein synthesis rates and not very much else.
And as I say, you can rescue that with strength training.
So now just to be kind of 100% clear for people who are interested in being 100% clear, the reason I
say that calorie restriction reduces muscle protein synthesis and as a result is going to produce
atrophy compared to, you know, calorie balance is because we've got some really, really well
controlled human trials on this, both from an artery point of view and also from an MPs point of
view.
Now when I say really controlled trials, I'm just going to flex a little bit because most of the
time when I see hypertrophy and body comp researchers doing this, they're not controlling for the
muscle Physiology side of things.
Let me give a a good example of this.
So imagine you've got either a group of people or a group of mice or rats, doesn't really matter in
that particular situation.
And you've got 11 contingent of them, one group of them, subgroup of them that are dieting and one
group that's not.
And essentially all you're doing is controlling for, you know, the amount of calories they consume
and you're saying we're going to allow them to carry on doing their normal physical activity levels.
And you think that you've now controlled physical activity.
You haven't, not from a muscle Physiology point of view.
You might have done from a body comp hypertrophy point of view if you're thinking systemically.
But if you think on a muscle by muscle level, you're not.
And the reason you're not is because if body weight changes, then the motor unit recruitment
required to do a same, the same physical activity changes.
If I like.
Just imagine if I'm getting up and down out of a chair.
That requires a certain level of recruitment, certain level of effort to achieve.
If I put a weighted vest on, it now requires more effort.
If I take the weighted vest off, it requires less effort.
So from a muscle point of view, different body weights massively impact on my ability to retain
muscle mass with my normal physical activity.
If I need 3540% of my routine recruitment to walk up the stairs with one body weight, but then I
lose somebody weight and then now I only need 30%, my muscle mass is going to reduce accordingly
because I'm not going to train the muscle fibers in that 10% gap.
So we've got some really nice data in immobilization where you've got immobilized people and you
essentially have calorie deficit groups and calorie balance groups.
What you see is that muscle mass loss happens faster in the calorie differs group than in the
calorie balance group, and that is 100% controlled from a muscle point of view.
Now this is just a really good example of why I say that applying muscle Physiology frameworks to
the discussion of calorie restriction and atrophy and, and, and, and what happens in that phase is
really useful because it's telling the thing that the current kind of nutritional body comp driven
processes or frameworks are not telling you because they're not thinking like that.
So that's kind of like just a quick aside just to describe why I think, you know, this is an
important thing to kind of consider.
Coming back to this idea of there being two different sort of states that we can be in with calorie
restriction, you've essentially got this, as I say, scenario where you're just getting a reduction
in muscle protein synthesis.
You can kind of then sort of distinguish that from things like sleep restriction, which we talked
about recently, which is where you get a reduction in muscle protein synthesis as well as a muscle
protein breakdown increase.
Now you can can push caloric restriction to a point where it starts to behave like a stressor and
then it starts to look more like sleep restriction and you start to get an elevation in muscle
protein breakdown rates and everything starts to behave a lot more kind of aggressively.
Now, what's interesting is in, I mean, there's a famous meta analysis from 2022 where they showed
that if you take calorie deficits beyond like 500 calories a day on average in strength training
populations, then you start to experience muscle loss despite the fact that you're still doing a
strength training program.
Now, we can argue around the edges about whether those strength training programs are keeping people
in a kind of stimulus phase, you know, the whole time.
Almost certainly not, you know, so maybe the number is slightly bigger if you're doing full body
every other day with exactly the same exercises.
But the point is that you do start to see this muscle protein breakdown increase at the same time as
a muscle protein synthesis suppression.
And even if your workouts are, you know, kind of rescuing that, they're probably not rescuing it as
effectively as they were with a smaller deficit or a less stressful experience.
And at the same time you must prating breakdowns are breakdown rates are increasing, which you
probably aren't defending against.
So I think there's this kind of shift as we go from caloric restriction, which is in a non stress
state and caloric restriction which is in a stress state.
And it actually completely changes what's possible.
So a lot of people will say to me, can I gain muscle and deficit?
And I'm like, yes, but with caveats.
You know, if you start to experience that as a stressor, then no, it won't.
Because I think what will happen is that the, the suppression of muscle protein synthesis rates will
increase and the increase in muscle protein breakdown rates will get out of hand when your balance
over the week will end up being net atrophy instead of net hypertrophy, even though you're doing
everything right on the strength training side of things.
And this then brings me back to your original question, which is, OK, So what does you know, kind of
dietary protein do?
Well, as I said before, dietary protein is going to help you, as the nutritionist correctly point
out, you know, recover in the post workout period because it will increase most proteins.
And this is that contributes to both repair and hypertrophy.
But what's interesting is that in dietary situations, in dieting situations, sorry, we start to see
that the beneficial effects of dietary protein start to reduce.
So if you're in a state of chloro restriction, then that bump in muscle protein synthesis post
workout that you're expecting to get from consuming your protein starts to get smaller.
And it, it's really interesting to kind of, you know, and this is the reason I gave that background
amount there being two different types of chloro restriction, one that's a stressor and one that's
not.
And there's probably a grey area between the two is because I'm not sure from the minimal amount of
data we've got at the moment whether that suppression of dietary proteins effect on muscle protein
synthesis happens in situations that are irrespective of whether it's a stressor or whether it's
only when it's a stressor.
But it definitely happens when, you know, if we assume that stressor is always going to be the worst
of the two, I think, you know, any scenario where we're pushing caloric restriction into stress
territory, we would expect it to start to behave, you know, in a state where, you know, more dietary
protein probably isn't helping very much.
So, you know, what's really interesting is that I think, you know, nobody really wants to be in that
state.
So at some point, you know, somebody's going to have to go away and see whether dietary protein
effects on Osprey synthesis are suppressed at low calorie restricted levels or whether they're, you
know, only expressed that phenomenon is only observed in more severe calorie deficits or sustained
severe calorie deficits.
Obviously it's probably just going to be a sliding scale, but at the end of the day, it is, it is
happening and it is a thing, you know.
So just in general, I don't really like to comment too much on the nutrition stuff, but I think
there is definitely an argument to say when people are looking at their macros for a period of
dieting, I would definitely look not just at protein and go, if I, I think there's this tendency,
people just go, if I throw enough protein at the problem, then I'll be OK, you know, and it'll
somehow protect them from muscle.
It won't if your calorie deficit gets too big, it absolutely won't.
I'm absolutely confident about that.
Is the duration the MPs is elevated for with the muscle with the protein, is that reduced as well?
Or is it just that that spike that's reduced?
I the to my knowledge there's no time point data.
We're just dealing with with just like very, very basic observations at the moment.
So I don't really know shape, curve or anything like that.
Like how would someone rationalize it?
More protein?
Once you've kind of like maxed out, what's going to be providing that NPS spike anyway?
Why would more protein even be beneficial?
Not even sure what that argument would actually be relying on.
We'd obviously need to get somebody who's more versed in that literature to comment on that.
But my understanding is that there is a belief that it impedes the atrophy effect or it impedes the
breakdown effect.
And I don't, I don't think that's what's reflected in the data that I'm looking at.
What I'm looking at is that the, the, the stress response, the glucocorticoid response has a, an
oxidative stress has multiple pathways that produce oxidative stress, which then start to create
atrophy.
And they are largely kind of going to do that independently of what you're eating and in fact,
independently of what you're exercising as well.
I think the way to think about it is that when, when, when your, when your, when your caloric
restriction is not behaving like a stressor, then essentially you've got a lot of flexibility over
what you can do.
Your nutritional interventions will have an impact.
Your strength training will have an impact.
And you can kind of manage the process from a positive point of view.
It's like, yes, you're dealing with an MPs reduction due to the due to the calorie restriction.
That's totally true.
But you can still work with that.
I think when you start to push calorie restriction to a higher level.
Now just pause for a moment to comment on numbers.
I can absolutely guarantee that both you and I are now going to get people demanding to know the
exact number of calorie, you know, the exact quantity of calorie deficit they should use in order to
avoid muscle loss.
And they'll keep asking that no matter how many times I say that's not possible.
The physiological answer is that if you are perceiving it as a stressor, then it will be a stressor.
So if the number is lower, then it's lower.
If the number is higher, it's higher.
Now, I've said before in other places that I know roughly what my numbers are for a stress response
to be created and they're a lot lower than 500 a day.
And I think they're more like 2 or 300 a day.
And that's because I'm old and like my brain is always doing stuff.
So I kind of have that issue there.
But ultimately and other people's maybe higher, you know, this is the point is not the number.
The point is, are you experiencing as a stressor?
If you're experiencing as a stressor, then you're going to get a glucose or to a response that's
going to create oxidative stress, which is going to produce, produce this muscle protein breakdown
acceleration.
And as a result, you're going to lose muscle mass irrespective of what else you're doing, right?
It's just like you've got to think about these things in areas like 2 totally separate frameworks.
Yes, there's a Gray area in the middle, but fundamentally this is 2 separate frameworks.
If we can manage it from a non stress point of view, then it's totally manageable and things will
have an effect.
As you start to drift higher into the calorie deficit sort of area and it becomes a stressor, then
you have problems.
Now the interesting thing is of course that anabolics make this entire argument go away, you know,
because ultimately being a glucocorticoid response, it is essentially, you know, the exact polar
opposite of the anabolic response.
Glucocorticoid and anabolics are literally polar opposites to each other.
So if somebody is using anabolics as part of their pre competition preparation, everything I've just
said is completely irrelevant because it's just not going to happen.
You're going to get a permanent increase, not permanent, but you're going to get a constant increase
in MPs and you're not going to have the muscle protein breakdown issue that you get with the
glucocorticoids because they're just not going to be there.
It's the same thing we mentioned when we were talking about sleep restriction a few weeks ago.
And you made that comment there as well about Anabolics.
And I think in that episode we made a comment about doing caloric restriction alongside poor sleep
would be a bad idea.
And this is explaining why that.
Would be recipe.
You're just you're just creating 22 in two drivers of the same problem and you just summon them
together.
But again, you know, somebody who is, you know, kind of using anabolics is going to listen to this
and go.
That's not my experience at all.
I'm like, no, won't be.
Yeah, absolutely won't be.
You could, you could have horrible sleep and you could eat, you know, you could have a huge caloric
deficit, you know, and, and the animal that would completely obliterate all of those negative
effects.
And that's what we see.
No, that's, that's what, that's what bodybuilders are, you know, I think are able to get away with
in those in those scenarios where they are using those compounds.
And I don't know if you able to comment on this and not, but presumably we would at least see some
of that mitigation even just with like TRT for example, it doesn't have to necessarily be super high
doses of anabolic sort of have effect as far as reducing muscle protein breakdown.
So, so, yeah, I mean, this is tricky because a lot of the time most of the anabolic steroid research
is done in animals models because obviously it's easier to get through ethics.
So it you kind of like it's really hard to transpose dosages to to humans in those scenarios.
You can't really go, oh, well, this is the dosage in a, in a, in a rat, therefore that's going to be
the equivalent.
You can't really do that.
So you get a directional effect.
I, I say this all the time in Physiology.
Physiology gives, Physiology research gives you really good clear directional information.
You know, if you start going in this direction, you're going to get these kind of effects.
It gives you horribly, horribly poor quantitative information.
And like, well, at this point you will get this effect.
At this point, you'll get this size of it doesn't really give you that kind of data.
Having said that, you know, I think that there is a tendency in the industry for people to say that
TRT is not the same thing as anabolic steroid usage.
When it is, you know, I think there's a lot of people out there who go, oh, well, TRT is just
replacing your previous levels of testosterone.
Not, not really.
There is a definite indication on the hypertrophy side.
You can see hypertrophy happening even in in the few studies that have been done.
You can see hypertrophy happening even young people at what are essentially fairly common TRT
dosages.
You know, it depends on who you talk to and what the clinic is that prescribes.
But in the boundary of range, in the ranges that you see people being prescribed those, you know,
kind of dosages in that zone, you are getting hypertrophy in young people when those young people
are given those dosages in an experimental context.
You know, similarly, if you look at side effects, and we've been talking about this a lot recently
off offline, but you know if you look at side effects, you get side effects that are pretty
noticeable even in TRT dosages.
So one of my favorite sources of data for this is tendons and ligaments.
You get tendon rupture and ligament risk increases even on TRT dosages.
So, umm, you know, that's just, you know, go and look at the studies.
I've actually just pulled them all up and done a kind of analysis of them.
Uh, and you do see that happening.
So, and that's because of the anabolic effects that testosterone has or, or anabolics have in
tendons.
And that actually interestingly has a more negative than positive effect because the tendon isn't
gaining strength from size, it's gaining strength from structure.
So this is one of the things that people miss about tendons.
They go, oh, well, you know, tendons are a bit like muscle.
The muscle gets bigger, it gets stronger, the tendon gets bigger, it gets stronger.
No, tendon doesn't get bigger and stronger.
The tendon gets stronger when it gets restructured and the restructuring process starts with with
with collagen degradation.
So if your anabolic comes along and starts basically doing the whole kind of, you know, oh, we can't
have a degradation happening.
Breakdown is not going to happen.
The poor tendon sitting there going well, how are you expecting me to get stronger if I can't
restructure because you can't let me breakdown the stuff that was, you know, kind of weak
previously.
I need to rebuild this in the way that's more, you know, kind of resistant by a stiffer or whatever
it is that you're trying to do.
So the tendon doesn't actually adapt properly in those scenarios, you know, and you see that effect
even at very, very low dosages of anabolic steroid kind of so.
So I think really there is a tendency as a whole in the industry for people to go, Oh no, no, no,
no, you know, TRT is not the same thing as as, as, as what bodybuilders are doing with, you know,
larger, you know what we call recreational dosages.
You know, I think broadly speaking, again, it's directionally the same.
It's just you're going to get a much smaller effect than you get with the kind of recreational
dosages that bodybuilders.
Use.
So you've mentioned a few Times Now that that that sort of transition point with the deficit is when
it's received as a stressor.
Now there's not an easy way to identify when it is or isn't a stressor.
I guess we could look at perception.
Is that going to be more or less something you can someone can rely on?
Yeah, I mean, not wanting to push too far into psychology territory, but yeah, I mean, I think
ultimately there's a there's a interesting.
Yeah.
I think it really depends on how in touch people are with how they feel that that sounds really
strange because it's like, how can I not be in touch with how I feel?
But I think there are people who just kind of maybe out of habit, just out of, you know, the way
that they've run their lives for however long, they don't necessarily check in on themselves.
I mean, there's this kind of tendency in psychology research, talk about not psychology research,
sorry, psychology kind of as a, as a, as a, as a mainstream phenomenon.
They talk about checking in on yourself.
Like, you know, how I'm, how am I feeling right now?
How, how would I actually experience what's going on around me?
I think there's a lot of people who just go through life and don't check in on themselves.
They're like, you know, how am I feeling?
Do I feel hungry?
Do I feel sad?
Do I feel happy with all those things?
And I think if people are not doing that, then they, they are going to have a, a gap between their
ability to note and notice when they are sort of experiencing stress.
And whether they're not people who are in the habit of checking in on themselves probably have a
better sort of way of assessing whether or not they're experiencing something as a stressor.
As I said before, you know, we were talking about joking about it before we came on the podcast.
You know, I, I absolutely know immediately if I push my Co restriction into stress territory, my
mood changes instantaneously.
I note it and straight away it becomes something that I can really kind of, you know, act to, to, to
fix the problem.
I think there are lots of people who just kind of maybe don't realise that they're just feeling
miserable and don't necessarily put two and two together.
So I think it's one of those things where the process might be more about learning to observe
yourself rather than about, you know, wanting external metrics to tell you whether you're in a, a
stressed state or not.
When it comes to workouts, there's been a lot of discussion online about, you know, what's what's
the optimal training routine?
I'm not talking for fat loss.
I'm just talking in terms of a standard hypertrophy routine.
And there's sort of two competing thoughts.
And I know we've touched on this in in a past episode where some people say, look, you know, if we
look at, you know, bio mechanics and we look at muscle Physiology, this is the way we would want to
structure work out.
And then other people come out and say, well, I find that boring or I don't find it enjoyable and
therefore it's not going to be optimal for me.
And I want to do what I what I find fun.
And obviously there's a line there and we've explored that conversation in the past, but it sounds
like that's actually relevant when it comes to this, when it comes to dieting.
And in fact, you could have two people who would perceive a particular method of dieting completely
differently.
And I know I've had clients where I generally will get clients to log.
I'll get them to use something like My Fitness Pal or some similar app.
And some clients find that having some control over that is actually something that gives them a lot
of comfort and they enjoy that process.
And I've got other clients where their thought of logging is such a, it just hangs over them that
they, I'm sure that would be a significant stress in their life.
And for them, it would be better to have some kind of lifestyle modification where it's like maybe
we do some kind of intermittent fast or maybe we just do food, you know, substitutes or swaps or
whatever it might be to still get that person in a caloric deficit without adding that perception of
stress to it as well.
And, you know, just to expand on that a bit further, I know there's a tendency as well for people to
do things like, it may be a little bit less so now, but certainly in the past to have like, you
know, workout day nutrition, rest day nutrition.
And, you know, maybe one day would be high carb, one day would be lower carb or, you know, high
calorie, lower calorie, whatever it was.
I did that for many years with clients and got to a point where I found, you know what, it's for
most people, this is just adding stress to how they're viewing their weekly diet.
You know, they need to be thinking about they, they can't eat some more things each day.
You know, they need to have two totally different diet outlines.
You know, they and you just, they can't meal prep easily.
Like it just makes that process so much more difficult than it needs to be for a lot of people.
So perhaps this could be actually one of the the more important pieces to this conversation is how
do you achieve A caloric deficit for yourself that actually is less burdensome or less stressful for
you to actually follow through on?
Totally.
I mean, I think ultimately if people want to push the caloric deficit to the maximum level that they
can get to without becoming a stressor, they've got to take all the other stressors out because
ultimately we are working with the general adoption syndrome here.
This is talking about stressors and stressors are cumulative, you know, so you know, this is not
talking about post workout fatigue in in the kind of old general adoption syndrome model.
This is actually talking about the general adoption syndrome.
So anything that is stressful, there's going to be a negative.
So if you can, if you can find one dieting model that is less stressful than another, then that's a
win straight away.
So I think that probably has to be the guiding principle behind any, you know, kind of diet plan,
which is like, how are you making this as as stress free as possible?
The only modifications I would add would be that you'd, if you can take a carbohydrate supplement a
couple of hours before your workout, that's a good thing.
And if you can take some protein immediately post workout, that's also a good thing.
Don't worry about carbs post workout because you can't replenish them anyway in a muscle damaged
state.
This is the biggest myth that's come across from aerobic exercise.
All the aerobic exercise guys are like, you know, chugging carbohydrates post workout and going oh,
this gets me ready for the next workout.
Yeah, sure, because she didn't create any muscle damage.
You know, try that with muscle damage in place and watch what happens.
Absolutely nothing.
See you're only carbs pre workout, you want your protein post workout.
But other than that, I would say, you know, largely speaking, minimising stress is going to be the
better factor than anything else you can possibly do if you want to push that caloric deficit, you
know, a little bit higher, you know, But again, in terms of modification of strength training
routines, I think with whether you're in a caloric deficit that is non stressful or or stressful, it
doesn't matter.
Your recovery rates are still worse.
So whatever you were doing before, you need to dial that back a notch, you know, So if it was three
sets per muscle group per workout, pull it back to one or two, you know, but again, hopefully people
aren't using like silly frequencies or anything like that.
So they shouldn't need to modify anything other than workout volume.
So would you say like obviously if you look at beginners, you know, great composition is quite easy
to achieve.
You've got somebody who's never trained before, they can lose body fat and and gain muscle and it's
not normally going to be that difficult to achieve.
If you've got someone who's more advanced, is it reasonable to expect an advanced natural lifter to
be able to gain muscle while dieting, or is that a somewhat unrealistic expectation?
I, I think it's very difficult to say at the moment based on the literature.
And I think you would probably find that any gains would be so tiny as to be unmeasurable.
So I'm not expecting that to be answerable in, you know, my lifetime.
I don't think there's any reason.
I mean, like a lot of people get very confused about the difference between muscle Physiology and
systemic Physiology and they start kind of quoting laws of thermodynamic dynamics at you.
And I'm like, muscles don't care about that.
It's literally irrelevant.
You know, it's like, you know, did they get a mechanical tension stimulus?
And do they have the available protein to, you know, kind of act on that?
If so, it's going to grow.
But if you have chlorostriction in place, you're going to suppress MPs and it's going to stop you
from doing that quite as effectively.
So from a physiological point of view, there's nothing stopping you from doing that, except you're
going to find that of course your sort of rate of increase can be a lot slower than it would be if
you were not in that calorie restricted state.
Of course, if you push into the point where you've got the, you know, stress response starting to
kick off, then of course it's not going to happen.
In fact, it's going to go the opposite direction.
It it sounds like if you can see would be more important in someone who's dieting.
Well, yes, of course, because you, you know, you've got that suppressed MPs, so your atrophy periods
are going to be more pronounced and your stimulus periods are going to be less effective.
So if you lose any stimulus period that you could be getting, then of course you're going to be a
worse state than you were before.
So yeah, I mean, full body every day is always going to be the best on paper.
Full body three times a week is probably a pretty decent compromise.
Honestly at this point anybody who's using up a lower splits I don't really have any time for.
I think you meant to say full body every other day.
I think you said full body every day.
But we did do a process long, long time ago when we did talk about the possibility of someone doing
full body every day.
And we were talking about, you know, obviously keeping reps in reserves, doing single set lower
repetitions, being careful about or mindful of, you know, more length and muscle positions.
And, you know, it's interesting having this conversation.
It makes me wonder, you know, could that potentially be a feasible option if someone were or should
recover from that?
Maybe that could be an interesting approach.
Yeah.
And of course, you would just have to push that, that, that, that that sort of those concerns
regarding recoverability, you'd have to push those even harder in that diet.
So if, if somebody wanted to do, you know, kind of forward every day because they were like, well,
can we, you know, can we really mitigate the loss in muscle mass by by providing a small stimulus
every single day?
I think you would really have to be super careful about what you were doing.
You know, I mean, I would be leaving probably 2 reps in reserve, you know, like doing 3 or 4 reps
and just leaving 2 reps in reserves, something like that.
I'd be, and again, from a, because you have to remember recoverability in terms of sort of, so
coming back to this idea that, you know, leukocorticoid and anabolic hormones are kind of opposite
to each other.
You've got the same issues across the whole board.
Not just about muscle tissue.
So I would expect people to get more creakiness, more kind of joint discomfort and stuff in a diet
compared to when they're not in a diet.
So again, I would be super careful about everything.
So I'd want to make sure that I would just say don't do this with free weights.
For example, I would be like, don't, don't do this for free weights.
If you're going to do an everyday workout, planning a diet, don't do free weights.
Find machines that feel really super comfortable for you and even limit ranges of motion if you have
to, to avoid any discomfort whatsoever.
And I'd, I'd go very, very extreme in terms of protective of the, of the kind of the, the movement
patterns and the, and the stability and all those things to avoid any kind of discomfort.
Just even even then, like there'd be some situations where I'd still be cautious.
Like for example, one of the share a personal example, one of the things that catches me out is the
seated leg coat because I'm not a big guy, but I've got pretty, pretty strong hamstrings.
So I can move a pretty decent amount of weight on a seated leg coat.
But what tends to happen is it pulls my lower back right away from the pad.
So I'm, I'm pulling in, it just absolutely pulls me around and I can be absolutely pushing myself as
hard as I possibly can into the sea and my legs are still moving me around because of that, you
know, kind of discrepancy.
So that has caught me out in a diet a couple of times where I've been dieting and I've been going to
the gym and doing seated leg curl 3 * a week because I, I tend to drop back into full body a, a lot.
I do do full body AB.
I'd prefer it if I'm like trying to get things to, you know, maximize, but I tend to drop back into
full body a because I'm, I'm just like, well, it means that if I only get 2 workouts in, it doesn't
matter, you know, So I kind of see it like 3 * a week and that has given me sort of some discomfort,
you know, in dieting situation.
It never does when I'm not in a diet, you know, because I can just the, the, the, the, the, the kind
of the, the repairability is there.
Whereas if I start doing that in a dieting situation, I always tend to get crumbly lower back
situation.
The City of Lake is actually one of the exercises I've seen most the high sum of clients have issues
with especially stronger clients.
And from a lower back perspective, what not just because obviously some people do notice that
hamstrings do, you know, take a little bit longer to recover from.
That's a fairly common thing for people to observe.
But in terms of getting injured or just tweaking their back, the lumbar, I do have certainly seen
that in a seat of lake or quite a lot.
And this is where like for me personally, I use a seat belt if I'm going to use a seat of Lake curl
because it doesn't feel great in my back either.
And if you are, you're moving decent loads, it's it's pretty challenging.
It's aggravating when you're doing it in a full body workout.
You've just done some pressing for, which for me is a triceps exercise.
So I'm very tricep dominant.
So I do any kind of pressing and then I go and do a seat of liquor and I just don't want to press
into.
I'm like, no, no, this is not what I want to do right now.
I've kind of done with the pressing thing, you know, kind of can we move on and do something else?
I'm like, well, I actually have to press in order to keep my stability in this exercise.
So, you know, it's like, if I remember and I'll be like, OK, so I, I do my presses and then I have
to remember and I go and OK, so do some quad work and then do some pulling and then whatever else
and then come back and do seated like at the very end.
OK, now it's not quite so bad.
And I can kind of, you know, countenance the idea of using my triceps again, but it's just just an
example to put some kind of, you know, real, real life picture or, you know, colour to this idea,
which is that, you know, I think that it's not just about muscle recovery.
You know, the potential for overuse injury or, you know, discomfort or whatever I think is also
going to be higher.
And it might, it might be that it's, as I say, the motivation to stabilise myself is not there.
It might be the repairability of other structures is not there.
It might be a combination of all of those.
But I think it's definitely a factor that I'll be aware of is, you know, if you are are going to go
down the route of trying to give a super high frequency, then you know, just try and take all the
risk out of the program as you can is what I would do.
Now, when you talk about stress before, you sort of mentioned it's the like the cumulative total of
all the stresses that we want to be conscious of.
And we're not just talking dieting stress, are we?
So obviously we've talked about sleep and, you know, lack of sleeping a contributing factor there.
But, you know, this would even be psychological stresses.
That would be, you know.
Relational stress is psychological.
Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, sure.
But you know, like, I guess.
If that's why it's a thing.
If people are like, you know, experiencing stress in their, you know, I guess in their work or in
their home life, like these are all things that are going to be contributing to that as well.
Hey, so might be the kind of thing where one might want to consider when would be the most
appropriate time for them to actually do a dieting phase or you know, are there are there
interventions that people could be using at that point as well?
And obviously you've talked about checking in with oneself and actually seeing how they're feeling.
But you know, there's certainly are the interventions like, you know, even if we look at stuff like
earthing or grounding or meditation, all these things that have a positive effect around like
cortisol levels.
So there certainly could be other interventions or lifestyle interventions that people could be
looking at at including as well, couldn't there?
Oh, totally.
I mean, interestingly, checking in, checking in is more about trying to get the handle on what your
kind of numbers are in terms is, I'm not sure.
I mean, yes, checking in, I think for some people can be a stress reliever.
But the, the context in which I was introducing it was more about just trying to use your
perceptions to gauge where you're at.
And I think, you know, if it has a stress relieving effect, great.
But it's more about like it's, it's like a counter movement jump test before a workout.
It just kind of gives you a feeling of where you're actually at.
And I think a lot of people just don't know where they're at because they've never thought it's like
a fun, it's like a literacy function really for, you know, it's like emotional literacy really.
It's like, where are you at?
A lot of people just don't think to check in.
It's strange because it's almost like just, you know, doing basic maintenance on your car to check
the oil and check the, you know, kind of state of it.
And is it capable of doing what you wanted to do?
Check the tyres, check the pressure, you know, are you, have you got enough water in the washer
bottle?
I mean, it's like, are you checking these things?
And then you can do the same thing with your brain in terms of, you know, the the state of stress
that you're in.
But yeah, all those other tools that you can then implement are totally, you know, kind of valid to
help people manage and alleviate some of the stress they're experiencing.
But yeah, I think the big stuff is, is like, don't try and do this when you've got a big project at
work.
Don't try and do this when you've got a relationship issue that you're managing.
Don't try and do this when you've got family members that you're taking care of.
Don't try and do this when you're older.
And a lot of people will say, Oh no, no, no, no, you can handle all of that stuff.
You can do it.
And it's like you can, but it would be a lot easier if you didn't have to.
So why make your life difficult?
Why not just organize this for another point in your calendar year or whenever when it's going to
work better for you?
Yeah, it's funny because, you know, given what you're saying there, it's like, well, actually the
best time to diet would be on holiday or on vacation.
It's like, oh, but that's when you want to be eating all these foods.
That's not going to help you with any deficit.
So it is a bit of a balancing act, but it's definitely something worth being aware of that, you
know, what else is going on in life and it's not going to stand in the way.
Or is that going to exacerbate some of the downsides that dieting is going to be causing alongside
it?
So, you know, even supplementation could have a role to play there as well.
Like you said, you know, these things are not going to, you know, necessarily, you know, mitigate
some of the downsides if there's all these other big factors going on.
But these are things that people could certainly be looking at and including.
Totally.
And I think there's, again, from my perspective, it's frustrating that a lot of the dominant
narrative around dieting has come from the body recomposition nutrition standpoint.
And it ignores the the muscle Physiology standpoint as the primary driver.
If and if we started looking at dieting as being primarily about muscle mass retention from a muscle
mass from a neuromuscular Physiology point of view.
I'm not saying that you that these approaches are not complementary.
I think they are complementary.
But I think at the moment we're losing a lot of information and, and, and usable practical knowledge
that we could implement simply by ignoring this side of things.
From a supplementation point of view, I think that if researchers start to take into consideration
this kind of framework, then they would have a number of interesting avenues they could pursue,
especially around the oxidative stress side of things.
Because the way in which glucocorticoids produce atrophy is by me.
We talked about this in the Sleep Module, sorry, podcast.
Ultimately, we've got this issue whereby oxidative stress is being produced by the glucocorticoids
through a number of pathways and that is then driving the atrophy by elevating muscle protein
breakdown.
If you interfere with that oxidative stress.
And there's been studies that have done this, they've gone in and they've tested a glucocorticoid,
usually an exogenous one.
They've produced an exogenous, they've created this, sorry, they've implemented this regime of
exogenous glucocorticoid.
They've created an oxidative stress response.
They've noted that they've then produced a muscle protein breakdown response based on the oxidative
stress.
They've then gone in and applied an antioxidant and it's broken the link and it's stopped the
glucocorticoid, the exogenous glucocorticoid from leading to that muscle protein breakdown that
produces atrophy.
So there are some really interesting interventions that are already being tested in certain
contexts, but I don't what's not happening is that the body recomp kind of sort of section of the of
the literature is they're not looking at this stuff and realising that that's doable, you know, so
they're not thinking in those terms.
And that's kind of it's the same.
It's the same thing that happens when you try to talk to hypertrophy researchers about what they
call stretch mediated hypertrophy.
And you're like, hey, guys, this is just psychomerogenesis.
And they run around screaming, waving their hands in the air and you're like, come on, guys, It's
not, not that or Physiology.
Come on.
And it's the same thing we've got here with, you know, the body recomp is kind of going its own way.
And like there's some really interesting stuff being done physiologically around glucocorticoids and
exogenous or exogenous or endogenous, but they look looking at that stuff and showing how it works
and how it produces atrophy that is absolutely usable.
It's just that it hasn't quite, they haven't quite made those connections yet.
So I think it's really, really interesting.
I'm not saying that I think that antioxidants are a good idea because they have got downsides, but I
think there's there's there's data there that could start lines of investigation for people who know
more about that stuff than I do.
Now, I'm sure there's going to be people listening who are going to be thinking, OK, you've
mentioned a large deficit could be more problematic potentially due to the stress response.
Now there's some people, and I would put myself in this campus well, who do prefer to do like
shorter bouts of or maybe even like intermittent dieting periods where they might do like a larger
calorie deficit for either a few days at a time or they might do it for a couple of weeks and just
sort of reduce our total dieting period as opposed to just a, you know, smaller deficit, a couple
100 calories for, you know, 12 weeks or whatever.
Now, obviously the, the main thing you've got up there is, hey, this is probably going to become a
stressor if it's a significant deficit.
Is there anything else worth being aware of?
Like if we were to look at, you know, this shorter creation of dieting at A, at a larger deficit
compared to because in my mind, I'll tell you what's happening in for me when I do this, I think to
myself, OK, if I'm in a deficit and I know that there's this reduction in MPs and I know that I'm
probably not going to be building significant amounts of muscle over this time.
Is it going to be better for me to draw this out over 12 weeks and potentially kind of not really
get anywhere and just, you know, do that dieting period or, OK, maybe there'll be this increase in
muscle protein breakdown if I do this significant chloric deficit.
But if I get it over and done within a couple of weeks, I can now go back to actually building in
only a few weeks time.
Is there do you have anything to sort of say to either side of that or is it kind of going to be
someone's individual preference?
I would say that it's going to depend on the steepness of the curve of how how so obviously, yeah,
it's going to depend on the steamness of the curve of your glucocorticoid response essentially.
So if, if you're, if you're sort of short periods of time with with large deficits produce a really
big stress response, then atrophy is going to happen really quickly.
And so you're going to go backwards really fast if it's producing, if you're so like if you've got a
really steep curve on your glucocorticoid response.
So it's, it's hammering you down into really negative territory really, really quickly with, with
just a smaller extra deficit.
If you had a really shallow curve, so you're getting a very small amount of extra glucocorticoid
response for an extra couple of 100 calories a day, then you're in winning territory, aren't you?
So it's really going to depend on on how steep your curve is.
So if if you've got got this really, really shallow stress response so that you add a couple of
extra 100 calories a day on a deficit and you only really produce a little bit more atrophy, that's
a shallow curve.
No big deal.
You can manage that.
If you've got a curve like that, which is how I suspect mine is, then you get this enormous stress
response from just going a couple of extra 100 calories a day into a deficit.
You feel absolutely horrific and you know that you're probably hemorrhaging muscle mass at a rate
that is not really sustainable.
So I think it really depends on what your curve looks like, and only you can really experiment and
play about with that and get a feel for what it looks like.
And again, being stressors, there are going to be aspects to them that are things that you can
adjust to.
So you know, for people who've been entertained into investing as a lifestyle choice for three, 4-5
years, I would not expect them to have the same kind of stress responses to a bit of fasting than
somebody who's not.
So again, and now everyone's going to run around going, oh, well, all I need to do is spam Internet
intermittent fasting and I can.
OK, Yeah.
Just bear in mind that it takes time to get through these adjustment phases.
So if you want to, if you're planning on doing a diet next year, maybe when you know, December
already.
So yeah, like if you're talking about, you know, there's a 612 months time, you're planning on doing
a deficit and you're planning on doing a restriction period and you want to use intimate investing,
fine.
You could spend a year getting used to that.
And I'm not saying a year is the right number.
I'm just pointing out that months and months and months probably necessary to really kind of get to
a point where it stops being dressed up.
Why?
What I think is a risky choice is to be a person who's, you know, been eating 3 square meals a day
since the dot and then say, oh, and for this diet I'm going to use intimate investing.
I'm like, that's not a good choice.
That's not a good choice.
It may, it may look like a good choice on paper to you, You may be attracted by the idea of it, but
you're shocking yourself with two separate stress laws, the actual kind of timing of your meals,
which you've become accustomed to, and the fact that you're still going to be eating less than your
maintenance level of calories.
That's two things that you didn't necessarily need.
You could have had one thing and you know, sort of got to the same point.
And I'm not, I'm not bashing into met investing.
I'm just pointing out that you know it is going to require a little bit of adjustment.
No, I think that's such a good point.
It's not a, I understand.
It's like a sexy point to make that hey, this is going to be dependent on the person and for some
people this is going to be potentially better for them.
Other people, this is me more suited.
But ultimately that is the way this is going to work.
And, you know, I would always present, if I'm dieting with a client, I'll present them two options
and I'll say, hey, we can either do it this way.
We can either do, you know, say often what I'll do is, is multiple days a week.
I might do it every second day at a very significant deficit.
Or say, you know, three or four days a week at a very severe deficit, a few days of baseline.
Or would you prefer just this like, you know, smaller deficit, keep it the same, Do that for a
longer period of time.
What are you going to find Less and Burninson and you know, and.
They might not know, they might actually not know, and they might have to experience both to know
which one worked better for them.
That's the point that I'm making is like, you know, everything that we can talk about around this
topic, but all of it comes back to the same point, which is that how are you feeling when you're
doing it?
Yeah, that's all it comes back to.
It's like, you know, and, and when I say how are you feeling, I mean, how are you actually feeling?
I don't mean how you think you're feeling.
This is what we're not talking about either.
Like, you know, something like.
Genuinely experience this, you know, because that's the real.
Because you can't.
You can't lie to yourself about your stress levels.
They are what they are.
So you can kind of, you can kind of fake it till you make it, but ultimately that isn't how your
body experiences stress.
So you've kind of got to be able to communicate with yourself and know what it is that is happening.
And you may have to try multiple different approaches to get to a point where the one that feels
least objectionable to you is identifiable.
And so all of the details on top of that are just marketing really.
It's like somebody wants to do it this way.
Somebody wants to do it that way.
It's just like, well, what it comes back to is, you know, how is the stress experienced by the
person?
Yeah, yeah, yeah, it's it is definitely interesting that two different people are going to have a
totally different experience.
So I mean, my favorite way by far to diet would be intermittent fast.
And I basically just bookend or I'll have some calories before my workout and I have, you know, peri
workout carbs and then I'll basically have everything else for dinner.
Why you're laughing?
Yeah, I'm laughing because I'm just looking at you in, you know, kind of the two totally different
parts of the world that we are living in.
You know, I can look outside and there's snow on the ground and there's a grey sky.
And all I can think about is getting a hot drink in my hand and maybe having some, you know, warm to
eat.
Whereas, you know, you're able to walk outside and there's probably blue sky and sunshine and a very
nice ambient temperature.
But, you know, there's environmental factors that feed into these kind of, you know, kind of
experiences.
But at the end of the day, as just keep saying, it comes back to how the person is experiencing it.
And yes, environmental factors are going to play a role.
But at the end of the day, it really does just come back to how big is the stress that the person
experiencing.
You take away as much stress as you possibly can.
You can push that deficit further.
OK, I've got one more question on macro nutrients.
So there used to be this idea that someone could push up carbs when they're dieting and especially
push up carbs towards the end of the day.
And that'll have a sort of, I guess, like blunting effect on cortisol.
And that'll, you know, this sort of like carb backloading would reduce stress from dieting.
And that sort of made a bit of resurgence lately, not so much around that.
The cortisol effect that people sort of really pushing hard hate carbs is like the thing that
matters.
Is there anything to that in terms of pushing carbs up during diet having some kind of this
mitigating effect on cortisol?
Or is that not really a thing?
I don't know.
It's a, it's a, it's a question that I'm actually very interested in.
I've mentioned to you before that I've collected a few animal model studies where I can see
correlations or at least visible relationships between muscle glycogen running down to very low
levels.
And around those times you start to see cortisol jumping upwards.
So, you know, just in terms of association that you could make a case for that.
I don't feel comfortable at the moment making a strong case for it.
And I haven't got to the point where I've got a model that I'm confident in.
So I wouldn't want to commit, but I am, I am in the process of collecting studies where I see them
and starting to try and build a picture because I do think there's something going on there that's
interesting.
Again, you know, it just comes back to, you know, does it help people individually?
Personally, I tend to drift in that direction.
I'm, you know, definitely run hot on carbs.
I don't tend to be able to function without them.
But again, people are going to be different and have different, you know, kind of experiences with
it.
So I think for now I would just keep going back to the point where it's like, try a bunch of
different stuff within a few days and just make notes, check in with yourself, figure out what it
feels like and then try to mean differently and do the same thing again and you'll figure out what
works for you.
When people come to me and they they're like pitching an idea and they're like, this works because
of these reasons.
I'm like, I'm not really, I'm not really going to listen to you because at the end of the day,
there's too many variables in there for that to apply to every single person.
What I'm more interested in is the person who comes to me and goes, well, I tried this and I tried
this and I tried this for like a week at a time and I experienced this one.
I did this, I experienced this one.
I did this and I experienced this one.
I did this.
You've figured out your own answer then, haven't you?
You've, you've got to appointment.
You now know that if you eat these things in these places or you eat these, you, you structure your
caloric deficit in this way.
You know that that M works for you at the moment.
I'm much more likely to, to sort of accept the kind of experiences the other person who's done the
testing because they've figured out what works.
And the point here is that people say, well, why don't you do this for strength training?
Because we're not talking about stress laws when it comes to strength training.
Like when people come to me and go, oh, I like training with this exercise routine and that works
for me.
I'm like, I don't care because we're not talking about stress laws anymore.
It's it's irrelevant.
So when I'm talking about managing stress, it's about how you feel.
When I'm talking about strength training is how strength training works.
Totally, totally, totally separate thing.
So strength training doesn't play by the same rules as stress management because one's about how you
feel and one's not.
So that's why we would say if somebody goes, oh, I tried three times a week full body and I didn't
like it, therefore I'm not going to do it.
I'm like, I don't care.
It doesn't change the fact that three times a week is still better than whatever nonsense prospect
you were doing before or like to do.
You know, that's not the same thing.
That's not the same thing as trying to figure out how stressful is being experienced in your dieting
phase, because stressor is the thing that's managing whether or not you're getting atrophy happening
or.
Not that seems like a really important point and I hope people have understood it, but is there any
more you can expand on that?
Because they had two totally different things.
Exactly what I'm saying is that when somebody comes to me and goes, I tried, you know, 10 different
training programs and I hated training three times a week full body.
But I really love training bro split once a week with each muscle group.
I'm like, I don't care, you know, full body three times a week is still better than the nonsense
because.
Your enjoyment or your lack of enjoyment is not influencing.
Marginal benefit, Yeah, it's a marginal benefit.
So the Physiology of how the muscle works is also the same regardless of your.
Perception of exactly, exactly.
When you're talking about dieting, you're talking about managing A stressor.
Because if you push the stressor to the point where it tips you over into it, it being net atrophy,
you can't really rescue that.
So you could be doing on paper what somebody has told you is perfectly correct and ideal.
And they could have given you a million physiological reasons why they're, you know, some kind of
super genius when it comes to body decomposition, and it still won't work for you because if you're
miserable, it doesn't work.
But because ultimately, it's the.
Psychological component, it's correct because in this instance psychology is driving in Physiology,
in strength training, psychology is having a marginal impact on Physiology because it's affecting
motivation.
But there are other things you can do to become motivated.
So again, it's like you can handle that problem to a greater, greater extent here.
It's the totally different.
It's like, if you're miserable, I don't care how many PhDs have put together a program that's
supposed to work for you, it doesn't work.
Yeah, I think that's a good point there that from a hypertrophy standpoint, this psychology is
influencing essentially that one component like that, that motivation bit.
And that's one of many things.
Whereas when it's coming to dieting and and stress, it's, it's the one thing that's driving all of
it.
And at the end of the day, that marginal change in moting equipment that happens due to motivation,
you still can't fix exercise selection problems.
You can't.
You can't, No matter how much you motivate yourself, you can't make a biceps curl train your calves.
You can't.
You know, you can't make, you know, sort of, you know, the trying to think of a slightly less and
less less severe, you can't, you can't make the coastal fibres of the PEC work in shoulder flexion.
You know, they're shorter extensors.
So it's like there's no amount of willing it to happen that's going to make it happen.
Yeah.
I mean, ultimately what we're saying is what can what of the Physiology we're looking at?
What can psychology influence?
And like, I guess that's really what we need to be asking because when people are trying to make
this argument that, oh, I enjoy this, I don't enjoy that.
It's like, yeah, OK, but what is that enjoyment factor able to influence?
And like you said there, it's not able to influence, you know, which muscle or part of a muscle is
actually being, you know, used in a particular exercise, how long that stimulus period is or, you
know, whatever.
It's not actually influencing any of those things.
There's only one very minor part it's influencing so or as in contrast, maybe a health.
Caloric restriction.
It can literally bomb you back past baseline.
Yeah, yeah.
Cool.
OK.
I think that's a good place to end.
Is there anything else you wanted to add before we finish up?
No, I think we're good.
OK, cool.
Well, it's it's a time of the year where people probably aren't thinking about dieting, but I'm sure
they will be in about a month and a bit.
So when you do start thinking about dieting, maybe come back and listen to this and start thinking
about, you know, what are some some ways that you could die in in ways that you're going to perceive
as being less stressful or just going to work better for you.
And it might not be what, you know, other people are saying works for them.
It might actually involve a little bit of trial and error and seeing what's actually suited best for
you.
So thank you guys for joining us, and we hope you'll join us again next week for another episode.