Episode: 019 Cluster Sets – How they work and how to use them
URL: https://open.spotify.com/episode/3onK5D0syOPu0tzLOxqZ2R
Published: 2025-09-29
================================================================================

Welcome back everyone to another episode.
I hope you're all doing well.
Good evening.
Good morning, Chris.
How are you today?
I'm doing very well.
Thanks, Jake.
It is actually morning for me this time, which is the thing.
This time it's around.
Yeah, it's like, it's like a lucky dip every week.
I don't know.
No one knows there's going to be morning for you, Evening for me.
It's afternoon for me today.
I think this is the first afternoon what I've done.
So we're just we just pick random times every week.
It's always a bit of fun.
Anyway, I have another Ridge Park.
We're having a bit of a joke before we started recording because I suggested another Ridge Park plan
for you guys today and you laughed at me and you guys, this is you.
This is the third one in a row, which it's not, it's only the second, but this is the third one we
have talked about so far.
However, I do think it is a very interesting plan and I do guarantee you guys that next week I won't
talk about Dredge Park for anyone else who's getting a bit sick of it now, last week if you guys
listened, I shared a calf specialization phase and it was quite interesting.
And I think you should go back and listen if you haven't.
And it's quite relevant for some of the conversations happening today.
And I think we can obviously learn quite a lot from how these guys were doing things.
And in fact, I meant to tell you in the gym today, I actually saw someone on the standing calf
raised machine and they're abandoning it.
And it was very interesting to me because we were talking about this in judges planned last week,
where at the end of his standing calf phrase, he talked about doing the isometric essentially to to
fatigue a failure at the the end of the set.
And it basically achieves the same thing as banding it.
Because obviously with a lot of people will find with a standing calf phrase, the limitations on the
load.
And if you, you can use a full stack and sometimes you might be able to do 203040 repetitions with
it.
So the band allows one to get to failure quicker, but obviously it makes the top of that repetition
the most challenging part, which is not necessarily ideal for the gastroc.
So it was interesting to see kind of the same mentality as what Reg was doing 75 years ago back with
a band in the modern gym.
Anyway, for me it's a bit of a felt like an inception or something like that.
Anyway, today I have a chest specialization phase and we're not actually talking about chest today,
but there is something relevant to it and you'll learn what that is shortly.
So as I mentioned last week with the calf specialization, the idea of these specialization phases is
that you do them alongside your other work.
So this is part of a full body plan.
You take out the usual chest work or the the work that's overlapping and you do this instead.
And then you do your, your other stuff.
Now this does have a leg exercise in there, just one leg exercise, a squat, which I'll talk about.
But you would obviously probably use this as your leg exercise and take out the the other leg stuff
as well.
So you can kind of like mix and match a little bit.
So I'm just gonna talk about the, the chest stuff and and the squat exercise.
So like I said, this is going to be incorporated in a full body plan.
Now we start with an incline bench and for each of these exercises, actually there's he does three
sets of each exercise.
OK, so each exercise I mentioned three sets of each with the exception of the squat.
And so we start with an incline bench and this is moderate drips.
He's doing like 8 to 10 for each of these.
So incline bench, which are not that it particularly matters, but the way that they did the incline
bench back then was often a little bit different, was actually more of a, a standing incline bench.
I don't know if you've seen these.
Have you seen the pictures or no?
You're having your shaking head O it was kind of like a, I guess like a long board and you would
lean against it.
There's photos of Steve doing these.
I'm not sure if I've seen any photos of Reg.
I don't know at what point they introduced like the standard incline bench, but for all intents and
purposes, it'd be very similar.
So I guess you could call it a standing incline bench.
And then we move into a dumbbell bent pullover and then we go into our squat.
Now you guys are going to pay attention here the way we did.
No, the way Greg did this squat is he would do 20 repetitions in total and he would use a heavy
load.
Now these guys love to just kind of give vague instructions like heavy load or moderate load.
So he didn't exactly explain what the heavy load was, but obviously it should be a load that'll be
challenging for what I'm about to share.
And every 3rd breath he would do 1 repetition.
So he would breathe in deeply twice.
And on the third he would do a repetition and repeat that.
And he says as he got to 10 to 15 repetitions, he would then up it to five breaths between each
repetition until you get to 20.
So there's a few different ways of doing that.
So people will call this breathing squats, A20 Rep squat method.
There's a few different names for it.
Very popular in the silver area, sort of into the golden area.
It is popular as well.
Then it sort of fell out of a little bit, but there's a few different sort of loading structures
people use.
Usually people would say you start with A10 Rep Max, but generally in those scenarios they would say
you would start this sort of breathing stuff in the the 10th repetition onwards or 8 to 10
repetitions onwards.
So the fact that they're just saying hey, from the get go from the first repetition we're doing
this, that insinuates me that he's using a heavier load.
So he went from that into dumbbell flies.
Now he called these breathing dumbbell flies, which I think basically just meant that you're still
kind of out of breath from the squat.
And this was sort of, they had a bit of an idea that doing pullovers or flies, some kind of chest
exercise after the squat somehow had like a rib cage expanding effect, which I don't know if you'll
comment on that in a moment, but I don't imagine there's a whole lot to that.
But they, I don't know, a lot of people talked about it.
And then he went back into the dumbbell pullover, which again was part of that chest rib cage
expansion idea.
So I don't think he went very heavy with that.
I don't think that's kind of the idea.
That was more like is a stretching exercise, if you will, rather than Max effort.
And then he went into dips and then you would add whatever else you wanted to add.
So there's a fair bit of work there and some bloody exhausting squats.
What do you make of that?
So obviously it's difficult to talk about exercise selection because the context of this program is
such that it's adding to or fitting in with something that is already being done.
What I can't or what we perhaps can't do this time is to say, oh, well, you know, this exercise
selection suggests that, you know, they're missing these or they're benefiting from this because
there isn't a complete program.
So really, I think as we were talking about before, you know, we got on the podcast, the interesting
thing for us today is this breathing squat section and, and what that entails and what's actually
happening.
So, you know, unless you have any other comments on the other parts of the program, I would suggest
we just jump in and talk about that.
Yeah.
I think it's interesting just to note the diversity in the chest exercises that he was doing.
So obviously we've got an incline bench, then we've got a flat.
No, not in that order, but we've got incline bench.
We've got to fly, got to pull over the dips.
Obviously that'll depend a little bit on how they're being done, but it's just interesting that he
has somewhat achieved or managed to, you know, bias different regions within a few different
exercises.
So I think there's a bit of intuition that's gone into this.
Sure.
I think, but I would probably also mention that there is a very popular idea that incline benches
are curricular PEC and flat benches are you know, kind of sort of more sternal or more kind of a mix
of the of the three regions.
And while that's not untrue, it has a far smaller effect than moving between transverse and sagittal
plane pressing.
So often when people say to me, what's the best exercise for clavicular PEC or what's the best
exercise for sternal PEC.
And my focus immediately is on the plane of motion, not on the range of motion because really the
resistance profile, because really when you're moving between incline bench and flat bench or any
other inclined bench, you're just changing the range of motion or the the point of peak effort in
the shoulder angle or the shoulder joint angle range of motion.
Whereas plane of motion where you're coming from wide grip transverse into narrow grip sagittal that
has an enormous impact.
And the clavicular is much more involved in sagittal than it is in the transverse.
So without that knowledge of which planes of motion is using for his pressing, I mean, if his
incline press is more sagittal, then straight away he's ticking the locks as far as I'm concerned.
But if it's just like, Oh well, we're doing the same grip width, but we just happening to be going,
you know, kind of incline in this particular variation and flat in this variation.
And I'm like, well, honestly, you're not probably maximizing your kind of focus on clavicular versus
sternal or anything like that.
But if the information is not there, I just don't know.
He did.
So he in this, he was actually using dumbbells and the photos I've seen of him doing dumbbells, he's
usually using a relatively close grip.
So I do think there's going to be a little bit of that that variant there.
And he does, he actually didn't do it in this program, which is interesting because a lot of his
programs he's doing a very wide grip bench and he didn't have the bench in this program.
And I guess maybe because he's got the the fly instead.
But it would be interesting to contrast or to have that combination of a fairly close grip dumbbell
incline bench with a very like if you see photos of him benching often, his grip is as wide as he
can get up against collars.
So that combo I think would be quite effective.
Or even the fly, I mean pair the fly with the narrow grip incline mentioned.
Yes, I think you're probably mostly there and then the pullovers will give you some sternal, sorry,
coastal PEC.
So you've got the the fly for the sternal, the narrow grip incline for the clavicular and then
you've got the pullover for the coastal.
And I think, yeah, that would be, you know, your complete program, I think in all, to all intents
and purposes.
With the pullover one way they used to do this and I think Greg did it as well.
I think they call it a moon bench.
Have you heard of this?
So it's kind of like a semi circle bench and you would lie over the top so you're arching all the
way over it and then perform the pullover like that.
So I guess you're kind of a little bit more in a in a decline position.
What difference would that make?
I'm going to have to try and think about the resistance profile in my head now.
So let's just start with a horizontal pullover.
If you're lying horizontally on a bench and what it's going to do, it's going to move the resistance
profile away from the stretch position towards the neutral position.
So if you're lying horizontally, the most difficult part of the range of motion is when the external
moment on is obviously longest.
And that is in that stretch position because you know, gravity goes straight downwards and you're
perpendicular to it in that position.
So if you then move to a tilted position, so you're now, you know, kind of if you take it to an
extreme and imagine that you're actually, you know, kind of pointing directly downwards, which is
obviously not true, but you know, just take it to an extreme.
Your external moment I'm still is longest in that perpendicular position, but that's now halfway or,
you know, kind of not in the stretch position.
It's kind of closer to the mid range of the movement.
So you're moving the point of, you know, a peak effort in the excise range of motion to a more mid
range position, which is further away from the position where you're trying to spark your long head
and your sort of coastal pecs have the best leverage.
You're moving it to a position where the lats are going to be more involved.
So you know, because essentially it's it's it's kind of what you're really doing is a lot pull down.
But upside down.
Wow, straight arm, straight arm, pull down.
I guess not, not a lot pull down.
Does the fact that they did bent arm change anything?
Because they always is so clear about it has to be bent?
Not always, but you know often has to be bent arm don't have your your arms straight.
Well, you would imagine that bending the elbow would change the relative leverage of the trisects
brachy long head, and there's no data to my knowledge on on exactly what that is, but I would
imagine that given the behaviour of the long head, it probably reduces its leverage.
So the bent arm probably does start to shift things away from the trisects brachy long head and onto
the coastal PEC.
So I would imagine.
If he was allowed so.
Well, only in relative terms, because if you've got, say, two or three muscles working at a joint
and you start disadvantaging one of them, then you automatically advantage the other one, even if
it's not doing anything.
This is one of the things that people get confused about.
They go, well, this muscle has, for example, people will talk about the changes in the medial,
lateral and long head of the triceps brachy in accordance with shoulder range of motion.
And they go, how is it possible that media and lateral heads change their relative leverages over
the range of motion when they don't have any connection across the shoulder?
And it's like, well, they're not changing their leverages.
It's the long head, it's changing its leverage and that's changing the relative leverages of the
media and lateral heads.
Now you could get the same thing happening here.
So you know, bending the elbow and obviously the Peck and the lat across the elbow, but the trisecta
Becky long head does.
So if you change the leverage of the trisecta Becky long head at the shoulder by changing its
length, which is well known to change the leverage of a muscle, then you could change the relative
leverages of the Peck and the lat at the shoulder for shoulder extension.
So what I would imagine is that if you wanted to construct A and I'm just going off the basis of,
you know what, what, what these guys are doing at the moment.
But I would imagine that a horizontal position pullover with a bent arm probably probably has more
coastal PEC involvement than any other variation.
So that would be my guess based on what they're doing and also based on, you know, kind of what I've
seen of the trash sparky long head behavior and other two joint muscle behaviors.
But as I say repeat myself, I don't think there is any data showing how the long head changes its
shoulder extension leverage with elbow position changing so.
It's interesting how limited some of the data actually is.
Like you think that's a relatively like, I don't know, straightforward thing to have information on?
Well, I don't think it's very easy to do momentum calculations like that.
You would probably want to do sort of a separate kind of.
You could probably do it using a similar method to the London studies by using electrical
stimulation to measure the torque angle curves.
You probably do it like that, I would say.
But again, you know, does your dynamometer to let you do that easily?
It depends.
I mean, I don't know.
But yeah, I think that's that's a really interesting one.
I'm thinking that that would be a really cool sort of investigation to do to see how the the long
head of the triceps changes its behaviour in shorter extension according to what your your elbow
position is.
Now, incidentally, you could do exactly the same thing for, you know, looking, I mean, you could do
exactly the same thing for the rec fam.
So we talk.
I mean, obviously it was that study a while back where people did sort of knee extension training
either with a standard seated position or with a horizontal reclining position.
And everyone was running around talking about stretch mediator hypertrophy.
But the interesting thing is, is, did direct fem change its knee extension leverage as a result of
being put in a stretch position Now, because the muscles change their shape when you, you know, kind
of elongate them or, you know, kind of move them into a more shortened position by changing, you
know, sorry, 2 joint muscles change there leverages and shape because, you know, you're, you're
changing the, the length of the muscle.
You know, it should actually change its relative leverage to the, to the three single joint
quadriceps.
You know, nobody talks about that because they're not really bringing neuromechanical matching,
which is the prevailing model of how the brain controls the muscles in the body.
They're not bringing that into, you know, hypertrophy science, which is a bit of a shame.
But you know, that would be my first kind of question is like, does changing the length of the
muscle have that effect?
Because I think it it clearly does in the case of the hamstrings when we've got data showing that
that does happen.
And I think we've got indirect data suggesting it happens with the elbow flexors as well.
And I'm just kind of thinking to myself, well, does it therefore happen with the tries to specky
long head?
Does it happen with the with with direct fam?
I mean, those will be really interesting studies to to do.
Now I took it on a different path.
You wanted to talk about squats.
Let's jump back to this 20 Rep squat method.
Yeah.
So the, the interesting thing about the 20 Rep squat is, I mean, and there's, there's kind of
comments here about, you know, practicalities as always.
You know, there's this interesting point about squats where we're kind of saying, you know, we're
using a lighter load perhaps than we would ideally want to simply because of logistics.
You just can't get the, you know, the weight in place and all the rest of it.
But you know, just looking at it physiologically, one of the difficult things or one of the
challenges with exercises that have a lot of muscle mass like squats, deadlift, is that you have a
large cardiovascular response and the cardiovascular response and then starts to reduce your ability
to recruit high threshold motion.
It's because it's a sensation and that reduces your maximum central motor command at the point of
maximum effort.
Now, obviously introducing breaths between repetitions starts to deal with some of that
cardiovascular sensation.
So that's, you know, straight away, you know, you're looking at the rationale for doing this is
that, well, we're reducing cardiovascular sensations.
We're potentially going to increase the the level of improvement that we can achieve.
So, you know, that's, that's cool.
But also secondarily, we're going to end up doing more total repetitions than we would do if we had
not taken those breaths because we're introducing a period of time in which fatigue is able to
dissipate.
Now that's really what I was hoping to talk about today in the physiological section of this
podcast, because you know, when you look at clusters as, as this, what is the what this is, it's a
cluster set essentially.
And you're training, you know, perhaps in the context of bodybuilding still to failure.
Then what's happening is you're ending up doing more repetitions.
What are you doing more stimulating repetitions?
The answer to that question is we don't know.
So a little digression.
Let me just kind of fill in some gaps for people who are coming to this kind of concept for the
first time.
When you're thinking about cluster set training and you're looking at the literature and you're
listening to people talking about cluster set training.
A lot of people talking about cluster set training on the Internet will just start throwing studies
at you saying, oh, this study shows this and that study shows that.
And, and they'll start making all these kind of inferences and claims and, and building a case for
whatever it is they want to build a case for.
You've got to look at the studies and you've got to apply physiological frameworks to those studies
and think about what's actually happening.
So as we were talking about before we jumped on the podcast today, Retty much to my knowledge, the
vast majority of cluster strength training studies have used moderate loads and not all of them have
paired the training groups by, you know, kind of both groups training to failure.
So what you might have is 11 group training to failure with say 10 Rep Max's, three sets of 10 Rep
Max, something like that.
And the other group will train with say the same kind of Rep Max and they'll still do 10
repetitions, but they might have some rests in between them.
So they end up training further from failure.
Now you can still use that study if you're interested in stimulating Rep theory because you can go,
well, this group is doing fewer stimulating reps than that group.
OK, Well, you'd expect if the difference is big enough, and it may not always be big enough to
detect an effect, but if the difference is in the number of stimulating reps is big enough, then you
would expect your cluster set to produce slightly less hypertrophy then you're, you know, kind of
standard set to failure.
Now, I'll repeat myself.
If the difference in stimulating reps per workout is not big enough, you won't see an effect in the
same way that if you're comparing different volumes and your volume differences are not big enough,
you won't see an effect.
And that's ultimately why most training to failure versus not to failure studies where the
differences are small, like one or two reps per set, you don't really see much of a difference.
It's not because there is the difference is because it's just too small to detect.
So straight away now you've got to look and say, am I training with my two different groups to
failure?
If on the other hand, you find a study where you've actually trained to failure in both situations,
then now you can start to say, OK, my cluster set group is now doing more repetitions.
Maybe you're getting 12 reps out with A10 Rep Max, something like that, depending on how many reps
you know, kind of period you've taken in, in Intracet.
Now you can start to answer the question of maybe am I seeing more stimulating rates being done
because of these intra intra set rest periods that I'm taking?
Is this hanging together so far?
Cool.
Now the thing that I think is, is really interesting about cluster set structures is to say, well,
what happens if I'm using a moderate load, light load or heavy load?
And I think really this is where we're missing an enormous opportunity when it comes to strength
training research and strength training science.
Is because almost all of the cluster set studies that are done again are done using moderate loads.
Well, the problem with moderate loads in the context of stimulating Rep theory is that all the reps
you do before you get to your stimulating Rep zone are not really doing anything.
So you do your repetitions and you're just accumulating metabolite relative fatigue.
And if you're unlucky, you're accumulating other types of fatigue as well, which is suppressing
either recruitment or a mechanical tension.
But of course the metabolite stuff is what you're chasing and you you collect that and then when you
get to a certain level, you enter into the stimulating Rep zone.
Well, in that scenario, if you're comparing say a cluster program and a non cluster program and
they're using 10 Rep maxes, then what's going to happen is you're just going to end up in the same
place really more or less because you get into the stimulating Rep zone.
And then it's only really those last reps that matter.
And maybe you could string that out a little bit with your clusters at that point by taking rest
periods between sets.
Ultimately, you know, it's not really going to be be a massive effect.
On the other hand, if you're using a heavy load, let's say you're using a fiber Max and you do
clusters with a fiber Max.
Now that's really interesting because you're essentially getting a stimulating Rep from your very
first repetition and your cluster then allows you to do say 6 or 7 repetitions.
Now we're saying, OK, I did a fiber Max here, you know, all the way through, and then I did A5 Rep
Max here, but I did 7 reps with that because I had these intra set rest periods.
Now I've got 7 stimulating reps here on paper and five over here.
Nobody's ever done that study, you know, and that would be really, really fascinating.
Would it be big enough?
Or you might have to do multiple sets, you might have to do a longer period of time to see those
kind of tiny differences.
But I think you would start to get to the point where you can maybe construct a study that would
tell you the answer to, you know, am I getting more stimulating reps by doing those extra
repetitions?
And that's what I was saying when I started this little kind of explanation, is that we don't
actually know.
I don't think anybody knows whether that extra 2 repetitions in that context would generate more
hyper.
Are they genuinely stimulating or is there some fatiguing effect that is creating a suppression of
that stimulus?
Now my gut feel is that there isn't.
My gut feel is that you probably genuinely are getting extra stimulus because I can't really see
that fatigue mechanisms would create a problem for you in that scenario because the heavy load means
that it's just metabolites really.
And all you're doing by putting those rest periods in between repetitions is allowing a bit of
metabolite clearance and then you drop back again.
And then so you're basically just kind of going up in terms of fatigue accumulation, then drop down
a little bit and then up in terms of fatigue accumulation, then drop down a little bit and you're
just working your way through to failure.
And it takes a little bit longer than it would do if you were doing a straight set all the way
through a fatigue metabolite accumulation, which is going all the way through to the top.
I don't see that that allows same more calcium and accumulation particularly or more, you know,
super spinal spinal CNS fatigues.
Again, spinal CNS fatigue is being completely eradicated.
Wow, that's a bit of a strong statement.
Is, is absolutely being managed by those intra repetition, sorry, inter repetition arrest periods.
So ostensibly it looks better to me than a straight set in that respect.
So I think even if there were a little bit of a disadvantage in terms of calcium ions or a
disadvantage in terms of super spinal, I can't see that happening.
I think again, that would be better rather than worse because you've got time to recover from the
sensations.
I, I, I think that the advantage in terms of spinal probably outweigh any disadvantages.
So looking at it and again, hopefully people are getting the the vibe here that I am thinking this
through.
I'm not saying here is my opinion and then here's a bunch of justifications for it.
I'm just kind of talking this through and say this is what I am seeing when I think about the
fatigue kind of mechanisms that are ongoing in this situation.
And what I'm seeing suggests to me that very possibly we're actually getting the benefit, the full
benefit of all of those stimulating reps when we are using a heavy load to do clusters in that
situation.
And I think for that reason, it makes it a very interesting kind of concept, especially if you're
looking to volumize a particular exercise or, you know, kind of for a muscle group or something like
that.
So, you know, often in the past when we talked about volumizing something, we've talked about using
maybe contract positions where possible, using heavier loads, leaving reps in reserve, those kind of
ideas.
I think clusters probably fits into that bracket of, you know, ideas for, you know, if you just want
to throw a little bit more volume at a particular muscle group for whatever reason and those would
be an interest that we've implemented.
Last week we spoke about, I figure how it came out, but we were talking similar to your comment a
moment ago where you said you're not just trying to justify your kind of endpoint opinion.
And we're talking about if you start with this physiological model, it kind of opens up
opportunities or it sort of, you know, creates sort of these, you know, boundary conditions and you
can kind of push right up against them and see how things can kind of play out.
And in the conversations we've had over the last few years, classes has been one of those methods
for me that has come out where just talk talking about the Physiology, I've realized, hang on, this
is a method that really has a lot of legs and it's something I can play with and something I can
actually utilize.
And there's not a lot of those kind of advanced methods that people talk about that sort of fit that
bill.
But classes certainly was one.
And we'll talk a little bit more about some practical ways to use them.
But I just want to touch on some of the things you said in case people didn't follow.
So you mentioned those lighter Rep load classes and you mentioned say you're doing like a 10 Rep Max
load and you might get 12 repetitions with it.
And you sort of made this point that you, you might be getting maybe the same amount of stimulating
reps.
And I'm assuming most people listening to this will be aware of the stimulating reps models we
hopefully need to go down that path.
But essentially what you're saying, there's those first in, in a straight set of of 10, those first
five repetitions.
Essentially the purpose of those is to accumulate enough fatigue that you get to stimulating reps.
And by having those little clusters, those little rest periods in between, you're just slowing down
the accumulation of that fatigue essentially until you get to the stimulating repetitions.
So it might not be that repetition 6 is now maximally stimulating.
It might be repetition 8 is maximally stimulating, just kind of delayed it.
So the point you made is, hey, that set of 12, it's probably about the same.
And, and that makes sense.
And then you've touched on, well, if we assume that at about give or take a 5 repetition Max, we've
got sort of maximal voluntary activation occurring.
And and that's kind of the point where we're seeing the simulating reps sort of take effect.
Well, what happens if someone's using A5 repetition Max for those clusters?
So if we go back to Reg with these squats mention right at the start that a lot of the time the way
people use these is they'll do sort of that, you know, 10 repetition Max load.
But the way Reg has expanded here by using a load that you're actually taking multiple press each
repetition from the get go, I'm not sure what that load would be to in my mind, I'm thinking that's
probably like a six or seven Rep Max would be my guess.
So he hasn't potentially quite hit on that five repetition Max, which I've experimented with with
classes with, you know, 5 Rep Max squad and with a squad.
It is pretty uncomfortable to do classes with A5 Rep Max.
And I can kind of understand why my one might actually go a slightly lighter load for that purpose.
But the point you've made is.
It's absolutely a it's absolutely a logistical issue with the squats because if you were to do it
with leg presses where you can actually lock out at the end of each, you know, kind of deload the
end of each repetition because the equipment allows you to take, you know, kind of, in fact, if you
wanted to, you could just literally take your foot off the plate.
I mean, depends on the leg press is set up.
Not every leg press lets you do that.
But, you know, if you can completely deload between repetitions, then the IT becomes a completely
different animal.
I think the issue with the squat is that you're standing there with this weight crushing you the
whole time.
And that just makes life miserable.
Yeah.
But when you look at it in the context of say like a totally different exercise where it is possible
to take that loading off the body in between reps, then I suddenly think 5 Rep Max cost has become
doable.
Exactly.
Yeah, exactly.
And if someone gives us a go with a squat, what you'll notice is with any other exercise basically
where there's not a Barney back, the longer the interest set, rest period, the easier it becomes.
With a squat, it actually has this sort of paradox where you might take a few breaths and it makes
it easier, but then you stand there for too long and it makes it harder.
You're just getting crushed.
So it's almost this mental game of like, how many can I take and let some of this, you know, the
respiratory kind of, you know, higher heart rate, higher breathing, right?
How long can I let that dissipate for until it actually is now working against me.
Whereas you do another exercise.
So I do these on a hack squad or I do these on a pendulum squad and that's much easier.
You can kind of lock out, you're not kind of having gravity crushing you in half as a completely
different sensation to a barbell squad.
So these these sort of set of you know, 5 Rep Max clusters, you mentioned you can't, you can't see
any reasons if we're looking at the fatigue mechanisms as to why they wouldn't allow one to to
achieve more stimulating repetitions.
Now you sort of touch them in a little bit.
But if you look at, so you mentioned calcium, ionic type fatigue, related fatigue and you mentioned
superspinal and spinal.
You would think certainly spinal and superspinal that a cluster should actually be less, it should
produce less spinal and superspinal fatigue than a street set because you've got that little grace
period.
They're letting both of those dissipate calcium on related fatigue.
You would argue maybe marginally more just by virtue of doing more repetitions.
Yeah.
So before I answer that question, let me just come back to something that you mentioned 2-3 minutes
ago, which is where we talked about how well you explained how the stimulating Rep model basically
requires fatigue to be accumulating in the first few reps of a moderate load set so that you get to
a point where you're doing stimulating repetitions in the back half of a moderate load set.
So that's you, you're doing a say A10 Rep Max.
Your first five reps are just accumulating metabolite related fatigue.
What I want to do is just help people square the circle here because on the one hand, we're saying
fatigue needs to accumulate to get to the stimulating Rep zone.
On the other hand, we're saying that fatigue mechanisms can reduce the stimulus you're experiencing.
So some people kind of get really, really, you know, kind of confused by this.
And they go, how is it that fatigue is a good thing for stimulating reps, but it's also a bad thing
for stimulating reps?
Well, it's because fatigue isn't a single thing.
What we're talking about here is fatigue mechanisms.
So strictly speaking, stimulating.
That model says that it's the metabolite related to fatigue that's building that aids you in getting
to a point where you can produce high levels of mechanical tension and high levels of motion accrued
at the same time at the end of a set.
Any other fatigue mechanism is negative.
That's it.
It's that simple.
So if you've got 4 main fatigue mechanism categories, you've got superspinal synthetic spinal,
synthetic metabolite related fatigue, and calcium I'm related fatigue and they're all kind of groups
of mechanisms now.
Essentially the metabolite related fatigue is the only one that's innocuous.
That's the one that helps us get to the point where we're stimulating the hypertrophy that we're
looking for.
Anything else is either going to reduce recruitment in the case of the spine, spinal and superspinal
CNS fatigues or it's going to reduce mechanical tension in the case of the calcium amount of fatigue
mechanisms.
So that's the background.
So as you rightly point out, we've then got to analyze each of these fatigue mechanisms when we're
looking at cluster and say, well, you know, what's happening now, again, when we look at the cluster
situation, spinal is absolutely going to be less because it literally just depends on the total
duration of that's elapsed without taking a break off the muscle.
So if you're like an isometric holding that for long periods of time, you're just getting spinal
CNFT just going crazy.
I mean, that's, that's what we want to try and avoid.
And that's why whenever we talk about isometrics, you've got to break them up to make it work
properly.
Dynamics, you do get a break because of the eccentric phases between repetitions.
But again, you're still getting some of it there because you're still not taking complete
deactivating, still with the brakes that you get with clusters.
That's fantastic.
And we're now starting to see spinal CNFT probably be pretty minimal, and that's really, really good
outcome.
As you pointed out, superspinal.
Well, there's a bit of interplay here and it depends on the logistics of the exercise.
But yeah, if you've got the ability to just take all kind of activation off the muscle and not have
any kind of feelings in that space of time between reps, then really superspinal is going to be very
low as well because you're just taking all the sensation out of the equation most and the.
Very least with superspinal it's going to kick in obviously the tail end of that set.
So at that point you should have achieved as many stimulating reps you would have got with this
straight set, and now you're still getting those extra bonus ones and that's where the superspinal
fatigue is going to be present.
Yeah.
But I would always just say to people, you know, kind of be aware of it because you know, like we
were describing with the squat situation, the fact that you've got this bar on your back just kind
of creates this miserable sensation.
So just be aware that supraspinal CNST is roduced by negative feelings and sensations.
So if in the particular instance, like, because I can guarantee that somebody will say to me, well,
I don't agree with you because you know, I do clusters and I feel miserable and what would they go?
That's the answer.
It's like, you know, it's like, doesn't matter how the theory pans out.
If I can say to you, you know, just just be aware of how you're feeling and if if you're feeling a
really strong sensation of discomfort because of some reason, then that's telling you you've got
superspinal CNFT present.
So don't overthink it.
But in theory it shouldn't be too bad because you are allowing these things to dissipate between
repetitions and therefore, yeah, it should be better.
So as you just mentioned, obviously spinal fatigue gonna be less.
Yeah.
So we need to look at superspinal.
We need to look at calcium, which you're going to talk about in a second.
Now, from a superspinal standpoint, I always tell my clients when we're doing clusters, be really
aware of how you set up this exercise.
So I'm going to be careful with which exercises I'm telling someone to do with classes.
I want it to be an exercise like if you've got a squat cage and you can only set it up where you
know, you can't easily put the, the barbell back the hook, so it's hard to do a lift off or you
know, whatever that exercise is, it's actually a lot of effort for you to do the class to do the
repetitions.
You have to hold the weight.
It's fatiguing.
That is actually going to work against you from super spinal CNS fatigue standpoint, right?
So from a setup standpoint, anytime you pick an exercise for clusters, how can we modify this setup
so it's reducing super spinal scene as fatigue?
And then we can do the same with calcium ion fatigue in some ways, but I'll let you talk about it
first.
Before I jump into that, let me just kind of expand on something you just said, which is that, you
know, we're trying to reduce all of these elements of discomfort.
We're trying to get rid of this complication of re racking the bar and, you know, kind of any,
anything annoying, frustrating, you know, kind of anything like that we're trying to get rid of.
Sometimes when I talk about that stuff and we talk about that stuff and other people, you know, kind
of address those kind of ideas in the context of bodybuilding, you know, the rebuttal, the pushback
that we get from other areas of the industry is like, you know, just to suck it up and do the
difficult thing, right?
OK, now just let me work through that because what they are not understanding is that we are sucking
it up.
We are doing the difficult thing, but what we're doing is we're directing all of our energy to doing
the difficult thing, which is purely producing motor unit agreement rather than, you know, allowing
some of our energy to be siphoned off and used to deal with this difficult thing instead.
That's all it is.
So it's like which difficult thing do you want to use all of your energy to withstanding producing
motor unit agreement, the central magic command, or dealing with all this other rubbish that you
know is extraneous and doesn't actually help us produce motor unit agreement.
Because ultimately you've got a maximum tolerable perception of effort.
You can either devote all of it to producing motor unit equipment or you can devote a portion of it
to sucking it up and dealing with these aggravations and the rest of it to motor unit equipment.
Pick one.
That's it.
I mean, and so when people what people don't understand when they push back and go, you know, kind
of just deal with it and do the difficult thing like, well, yeah, we are.
It's just that we're limiting the difficult thing to the thing that actually produces an effect
rather than, you know, all this other extraneous rubbish that you're dealing with because you think
it makes you, you know, I don't know, self-image, whatever self-image you've got of yourself, that
means that you do difficult things.
OK, fine.
But the point is that it's a choice of where you devote that effort rather than, you know, kind of
whether you are in fact in the effort one's, you know, training hard.
Yeah, in both scenarios where reaching A maximal probable perception of benefit.
It's just just how you get there.
Are you devoting all of it to recruitment, which is getting you the result you want?
Or are you devoting part of it to these other extraneous things because that makes you feel good
about it yourself?
Yeah, it isn't.
It is certainly an odd argument.
I agree with you.
Well, it's, it just fundamentally misunderstands what's happening.
You know, I think a lot of people say you're not training hard because you're not dealing with these
issues and like one of those issues don't get you where you want to go.
I think it's because you can externally see that, that effort, right?
So if you're doing, if you're huffing and puffing and doing dirty repetitions and drop sets and
whatever else and you're, you know, sweating.
Battling to battling to rewrite the barbed.
Yeah, exactly.
It's like, oh, I can everyone can see that effort.
So it's.
Performative.
It's.
Performance.
Exactly.
Exactly, but demonstrating.
It's signaling something which is.
It's a.
Signal.
That's it, Yes.
That's terrible.
That's really terrible.
That's that's, that's, that's, that's, yeah.
I'm not sure what the terminology is, but it's the opposite of of virtue as far as the Stoics would
be concerned.
You know, it's not inherently valuable.
It's just showing other people that you're doing something, which is, yeah, not not good.
But yeah, So no, the, the, the point I just wanted to address before I can move on to calcium ion
relativity is just to say that, you know, struggling with stuff that doesn't get you close to high
levels of recruitment is not inherently valuable, at least as far as hypertrophy is concerned.
I mean, it doesn't, it doesn't get you close to the goal.
Cool.
So in terms of calcium ion relativity, this is this is a little bit of a tricky 1.
So let me just walk through what I see when I think about this.
Before I talk about clusters, let me just talk about calcium ion versus metabolite related fatigue
more generally.
In general terms, when we're looking at the strength training set, broadly speaking, if you increase
metabolite related fatigue for whatever reason or by whatever mechanism, you tend to decrease the
amount of calcium.
I'm relative fatigue at TUS failure.
Let me give an example.
So if you're doing a strength training set and maybe there's just one kind of muscle group working
imaginary kind of situation here for a moment and you start changing the resistance profile.
So you've either got contracted position or stretch position.
So you might say, well, let's do you know, kind of lying leg curls, something like that.
And let's have a machine that allows us to change the the point of peak resistance.
So you kind of move it from stretched to contracted.
What you're going to find is that the OR even back extensions like we were talking about earlier,
you know, back extension is really a nice example because you've pretty much got the same leverages
for all three, two joint hamstrings muscles across the whole range of motion.
So you could like have either bands or no bands and you could have maybe some kind of resistance
that allows you to change or dynamometer and you can move resistance to point to peak effort to
stretch position or the contractor position.
And we're like, well, OK, so do we then start to see a difference in terms of fatigue accumulation?
Well, we do because as you have a stretch position, that kind of exercise, you'll get more calcium
amino fatigue, but as a result, you'll get less metabolite related fatigue.
The two things tend to kind of be like you, you kind of one or the other.
And because you're getting to the same kind of level of muscle force or kind of getting to the same
level of capacity to produce.
Do the exercise, but ultimately buy one mechanism or the other locally now.
So essentially we've got this this balance.
Now you can do the same thing with say tempo.
If you were to do Max effort repetitions from the first repetition, you're going to get more
metabolite related T than you are calcium I related T.
If you go more slowly, you'll get the opposite way around.
You'll get more calcium I related T and less and less metabolite related T because from the first
Rep if you go Max out, you're going to have fast switch fiber activation from Rep one.
You don't get that if you kind of view a self selected or slow tempo.
So in any scenario where you're thinking about strength training sets to failure, pushing 1 variable
in One Direction tends to either increase metabolite or calcium.
I related T proportionally to the other one.
Now the question is, does that happen with cluster sets?
And I'm not sure because I suspect it probably does.
I suspect that you probably do get a little bit more calcium.
I'm related to T because when you look at reps over time as you do a repetition and let's say you do
a repetition and let's say you're doing 10 Rep Max and you do it all the way through to failure with
no clusters.
So you just go bang all the way through.
What's going to happen is metabolites are going to accumulate and yeah, there's going to be some
calcium accumulation at the same time.
And you get to the end of the set.
And the rates of accumulation have been kind of constant for both types of fatigue mechanism or
groups of fatigue mechanisms rather.
So you end up with muscular failure and you kind of measure the relative amounts.
When you say constant, do you do you mean linear as well or?
Well it's not.
They're not linear linear because calcium marmotic tends to be very non linear.
It tends to kind of zoom up at the end of the set.
Which I imagine would be important in this context.
Yes, and metabolite related fatigue is non linear in the opposite direction.
It tends to jump up at the beginning and then starts to take tail off towards the end.
If you're doing if you're doing reps with rests between them or some kind of intraset rest period
structure, what's going to happen is that you're going to have a period of time in which your two
accumulating lines have a chance to go back down again before they accumulate again.
And the difference here is that metabolites will drop precipitously as soon as you give them a
chance to dissipate.
Calcium mines do not.
So you have a very different kind of recovery profile.
So your metabolites are going to go up and then drop and then up and then drop and then up and then
drop.
Your calcium mines are going to go up and drop a little bit depending on what's capable of happening
in that scenario.
And there's not a massive amount of data.
But the thing about calcium mines is that once they're there and they're producing their their
calcium mechanisms, those fatigue mechanisms can't be unpicked until much, much later on.
They take hours or even days to completely deal with them.
Yes, the calcium themselves will dissipate, but the effects of those will not dissipate, if that
makes sense.
So metabolite relative T mechanisms only exist when metabolites are present.
It's like the presence of the metabolites produces the effect.
That's not true about calcium.
Calcium ions come in and they precipitate a set of mechanisms and those mechanisms are now
independent of the presence of the calcium ions.
They're like, it's like dropping a kind of a weight off a Cliff.
Once you've dropped it, you can't influence the fact that it's now dropped.
That's what happens with calcium.
I related to tablets are not like that.
If they're present, they're creating the effects.
Like, you know, clouds produce rain.
Once you take clouds away, there's no rain.
So it's like the fundamentally different kind of approaches to creating the problem.
So what I think we'd see with clusters is you would actually get a little bit more calcium.
I related to accumulating simply because because you can't get rid of it really once you've kind of
started creating the problem.
But as you point out, mitigating that is that these calcium amylated feeding mechanisms tend to
really only become very noticeable in the last couple of reps of a set anyway.
So you're not really got a chance of producing a large impact of calcium amylated T until you get
towards the back end of the workout.
And that's why clusters are so much less problematic for calcium amylated T than something like drop
sets, you know, because of course, when we're talking about clusters, people will be saying, Oh
yeah, OK, well, cluster sounds exciting, but what about drop sets?
Well, what about rest pause and all these kind of other ideas that are, you know, kind of similar?
Well, with drop sets, when you're trained to failure and then immediately banging out another couple
of reps and then immediately banging out another couple of reps, that's calciumine related fatigue
heaven.
Really.
That's right.
I mean, they're running, running around having a party at that point.
I mean, that's, that's really going to create issues because you are in that zone where you've taken
all the way to failure.
You've you've got to the sort of the steep end of the graph with calcium and accumulation and
calcium and fatigue mechanisms.
And then you're doing it again and then you're doing it again.
As I will know, that's not what we want.
That's that's a really bad idea.
So just in terms of clusters, I would say on balance, I think you probably are going to get a little
bit more calcium.
I relate fatigue with the cluster, but I don't think it's going to be a lot more and I don't think
it's going to be problematic.
And I think so on balance, if you look at all of the T mechanisms, I would say that because of this,
the the reduced spinal, reduced super spinal, slightly greater calcium, I rate D overall.
I would say that's a positive impact and that's why I think we're probably going to end up getting
an extra couple of stimulating reps from a doing clusters compared to a straight set.
And like you mentioned, the calcium ioculations exponential at the end of that set.
So with that cluster set, even if you are using A5 Rep Max, then you're still like you would let's
say you get 8 repetitions out with that five repetition Max.
Well, because of fatigue has dissipated, you know, you've got whatever we'll talk about actually how
long one might do between reps and stuff.
But presumably, let's say in a normal straight set, obviously with A5 Rep Max cars and minor
accumulation is going to be less of an issue than, you know, 10 Rep Max or whatever.
But let's say the, the real, I don't want to say damaging, but the, the real impactful repetitions
in a straight set might be the last, what 2 repetitions would you say from a calcium on?
Yeah, give or take.
And so with that, that cluster, what we might be getting maybe a third like just because by virtue
of extending out essentially that stimulating kind of period.
So it feels to me like, well, that's kind of sort of the tricep admission.
If you're going to get more stimulating repetitions, you're kind of going to get more calcium on
accumulation.
It's it's kind of proportional to what you're expecting if you were to do another set.
I mean it's like, you know, you've done another half set and you've got another repetition worth of
calcium and accumulations.
Yeah, as you say, it's the price of admission.
So and and of course, if you wished you could just not, you could just not do that last couple or so
and you could just volumize as if you were leaving reps in reserve, you know, and that that then
just brings you to kind of programming issues around saying, well, OK, but how do I make clusters
work for me?
You know, can I see progressive overload and those kind of questions?
And it becomes more of a practical consideration, which I think, you know, again, there's ways
around that.
But ultimately in terms of sort of what we're expecting to see just in terms of stimulating
repetitions, if you're using heavy loads and you're getting an extra couple of reps in the cluster
set compared to what you would get in a straight set, I think that probably are stimulating.
I mentioned a moment ago, So I would always look at ways we can mitigate some of these negative
forms of fatigue, you know, in a cluster set.
And if we're looking at calcium on fatigue mechanisms, then probably the most important part from
the reference reserve which you mentioned would be exercise selection.
And so if I'm programming clusters, I'm not going to program an exercise where ideally not where
there's a huge kind of stretch component of that exercise, and especially not one where between
repetitions are left in a stretched position.
O for example, one exercise that I hate doing clusters on and I never program it would be something
like a seated Lego unless one had a machine where they could very easily take their legs out of that
machine.
Otherwise you're stuck in this essentially lengthened position, this stretch between each
repetition.
And that's going to, that's going to be your worst nightmare from a calcium on accumulation
standpoint.
So, and it's actually relevant to what we were talking.
About last very just, I was going to say you're actually connecting this to what we described last
time where people are pausing in a stretch position, put in a relax state, but in a relaxed state.
It's like you're relaxing into that stretched position between repetitions.
You're basically doing a static stretch between each repetition of your strength training set, which
makes absolutely no sense because you you could just do the static stretch afterwards and get all
the benefits, all of the benefits, if not more of the benefits, and not interfere with the strength
training set that you're doing.
It was such a strange thing to talk about because people are literally arguing that you could do
these static stretches between repetitions and and claiming that that was helpful.
I'm like, let's just do it afterwards.
Makes so much more sense.
I mean, go, go experiment with a seated local cluster and see how that study stretch goes for you.
You don't find how much your performance drops.
Now we haven't actually really identified or defined what a cluster actually is, especially when,
because if you compare it to something like rest pause, obviously drop sets a little bit different.
We don't really need a contrast to that.
But a lot of people do get confused between how does a cluster differ from a rest pause?
And I'm not sure if you've got a different definition to me, but for me when I look at that, and
again, maybe there might be different definitions out there, but I would say rest pause generally
will involve that first set taking the failure and then each mini set after it generally taking a
failure as well.
So.
That would be my that would be my instinctive definition, I think.
But technically really is a.
If you're thinking Venn diagrams, rest pause really should sit within clusters.
And it's sort of in the middle ground between a drop set as well, because a drop set effectively is
rest paused, but you're reducing the load.
No.
So this is, this is where I would say this is fundamentally different because when we talk about a
cluster, the word cluster means that we are grouping repetitions together within a set.
So what you're saying is that you're, you're putting rest periods somewhere into your set that
allows you to sort of make the set sort of longer really.
So with clusters, we've got, OK, we do this number of repetitions, then we take a rest, then we do
this number of repetitions, we take a rest.
You can go as far as single repetitions and rest between those repetitions.
OK, fine, rest pause.
You do the repetitions to failure and then you take a break and then you do another few repetitions,
then you take a break and then you do another few repetitions.
And technically, you could say, well, is that therefore a single set with, you know, kind of rests
and therefore you've got these three clusters of petitions.
Now if you wanted to and say, well, no, failure for me represents the end of that set, you could
say, well, actually, no, it's just three sets with very short rest periods.
So you could look at this, you could look at rest pause from 2 totally different spectors.
You could say it's a single set of clusters because you've got 3 clusters, but you are trained to
failure.
So arguably it's not one set, it's actually three sets, but with short rest periods.
And I think you could argue that from two different perspectives.
And depending on which way you come at it, I think either is probably OK.
Drop sets are different because you don't have any rest.
So technically a drop set is not a cluster because it doesn't have separate segments to it.
It's all one thing all the way through.
Yeah, that's an interesting idea.
I guess I would look at a drop set and I would think about it as actually having a bit of a rest.
Because if you think about, let's say you're doing, what would one do a drop set on?
Let's say you're doing some of the dumbbells and you do a set of 10 natural raises, whatever, you
put the dumbbells back.
See, that's an interesting point with the drop set because I actually intuitively wouldn't have
thought about that as not having a rest period.
So the way I've always sort of been conditioned to think about drop sets is from a programming
standpoint, you need to specify how long you're taking between a drop.
So you might one might write in 10 seconds, 20 seconds, 30 seconds.
So in my mind, I'd be thinking of a drop set as 20 seconds, pick the lighter, load, go again.
So it's interesting OK if there's no.
To me that would be rest pause but changing the load I mean.
And that's what I thought in my head, I'm like rest pause is basically a drop set.
We don't change the load and drops it as we change load so.
Yeah, terminologies.
So one of the things that I always emphasize, especially in the mentorship program when I'm trying
to get people to think about stuff logically and in kind of a segmental and kind of philosophical
way.
Sometimes it's a just because we give some words, we apply some words to a thing doesn't mean that
we've, you know, kind of changed the thing.
It's like we use words to describe a situation, but those were the map is not the territory.
The way we describe something is not perfect.
We're overlapping a template on top of a reality.
We've always got to be aware that we're doing that.
My favorite example is anatomy.
So just because we give a muscle Group A name, we call it the hamstrings, doesn't mean that the
brain sees that muscle as a single thing or a group as a single thing, you know?
And so when people say, does this exercise training the hamstrings, does this exercise training the,
you know, and I'm like, you can't think like that.
That's not how the brain works with respect to the body.
You know, and I think the same thing is here is true here.
Just because we give something a name and we say, oh, this is cluster, this is rest pause, this is
drop set doesn't mean that, you know, we've we've fully described it.
It's it's nature and we know exactly what's happening.
You know, it's like we're just giving words as conventions to try and give a shorthand to what's
happening.
Ultimately what's what matters is you know what fatigue mechanisms are occurring and how the rest
periods that we take and the loading repetition ranges that we manipulate.
How do those things affect these, the stimulating Rep kind of model?
Are they changing the recruitment?
Are they changing the tension?
And how does that then relate to the overall stimulus of the workout that we're doing?
So, you know, yeah, we can talk about rest ports and we can talk about drops out and we can talk
about clusters, and we can change the definitions a little bit here and there and try and understand
what they all mean.
But at the end of the day, it just comes back to what is the physiological reality in each of these.
Situations, Yeah, it's interesting, hey, like basically all these words are, is a tool to help
locate us somewhere and then when we find where we are, how we can start to talk about, well,
physiologically what's happening.
Yeah, they're just, they're shorthands.
They're not supposed to be like this is better than that, which is better than that.
It's like no understand what is actually happening because if like we've just found out your concept
of drop set was slightly different from mine.
I mean, that's that's that's fine.
I mean just now we know that that is the case.
When I say drop set, I always mean that we're not taking a rest between the, the individual drops.
But you were thinking that there was a bit of a rest.
I mean practice there always is, but but that then changes how we would then expect the the training
program to work.
And the actual specific physiological responses.
Because you would actually expect a better result from your drop sets than I would because you're
getting that little bit of a rest to allow some of the spinal and the Super spinal to dissipate.
So to go back to classes, I think it's important to define and not defined, but gives some
parameters as to the the rest periods between them, how that might actually look in practice and
what I guess similar to what you've just said there.
What I find interesting with classes is it's almost like it's kind of like putting, putting the the
cart before the horse where it's like we're doing clusters.
The clusters have to be done with 30 seconds rest and therefore can't do more than 30 seconds rest.
It's like, well hang on, ultimately all clusters doing is providing some period of time for those
fatigue mechanisms to dissipate, and the longer the better.
So really you could do 5 minutes between each repetition if you wanted.
That 30 seconds is not magic.
It's really it's a practical thing.
It's just there so you can essentially get the workout done.
So it's not that.
And if you do a 22nd rest between each single repetition and you're still huffing and puffing
between those singles, to me that's probably not the best way of actually programming that cluster.
Like, the purpose of the class is to let fatigue dissipate.
If you've got more time up your sleeve, give yourself more time to let more fatigue dissipate.
Well, this is exactly the same as the rest period conversation in general terms there.
And people say to me, how many minutes should I rest between sets?
And I'm like, well, how long is a piece of string?
You need to look at this situation and go, am I doing, I don't know, sort of single joint, single
limb exercises in a machine.
And I probably actually only need a minute or so, you know, am I doing, you know, squats or
deadlifts?
So I might need 5 minutes.
It's, it's depends on the situation.
And again, repeating what I've just said before, these concepts like rest periods, these concepts
like definitions of terminologies, it's all just mapping onto physiological reality.
You know, if, if as you say, you're doing a set and 22nd rest periods between repetitions or between
clusters of repetitions isn't getting you a meaningful reduction in the fatigue mechanisms that
we're trying to reduce, then, as you say, bump it up to 30 seconds and that the purpose is to get
rid of those.
And just kind of digress very briefly.
This is, This is why Physiology matters when you're trying to understand how strength training
works.
This is where you can't just go these Physiology people who just focus on mechanisms.
They need to be kind of, you know, sidelined and told to shut up.
Well, we're going to focus on evidence based, you know, strength training.
I'm like, you do evidence based strength training rather than Physiology based modeling and you're
not going to understand any of this stuff.
You're literally just going to be like, oh, well, clusters, We don't know what happens with
clusters.
You're going to be 1, all these people who sits there going, oh, we don't know what happens.
I'm like, well, yeah, we do.
You know, you just have to read the fatigue literature and then understand exactly what's going on
because ultimately everything you know has a a way of working fatigue is really what is happening
during these cluster situations or it's being manipulated.
Fatigue mechanisms are being manipulated while we're up, we're changing these rest period durations
and changing cluster structures and things like that.
And if you just work through how those deep mechanisms work, it'll bring you to an answer of what
you're expecting to see in terms of the effects of different cluster structures.
And so if you're using a heavy load, just to repeat that key point, if you're using a heavy load,
fibre at Max load, then you're getting a stimulus from Rep one and you can literally take as much
rest.
I mean, like you joked, you know, 5 minutes or whatever between reps if you want to.
But you know, it's like, you probably don't need to.
You know, you can, if you try to be efficient in your workout time, then you would take the rest
period that allows you to, you know, kind of stack up the repetitions that you want to stack up
without having useless time in your workout where you don't really have any sensations going on and
you're like just wasting time before you do the next Rep.
I think there's a, an efficiency thing there.
Definitely ultimately, you know, if you're getting a stimulus from that one repetition and
fantastic, then we can just, you know, kind of stroke to the workout in the way we want structure
it, have 30 seconds, whatever.
If that works, 20 seconds, if it works, 15 seconds, if it works, it doesn't really matter.
You know, I think again, people get really hung up on these numbers and like, do I do 10?
Do I do 15 or 20?
You know, tell me what the right number is.
I'm like, well, that's not the right way of thinking about it because your Physiology, your
tolerance to these team mechanisms is going to be very slightly different to other people's.
But find the number that is working for you and then just stick with it.
I mean, we're now starting to getting into practicalities and it's like, well, you know, how do
people manage this in the context of a strength training program?
How do they see progressive overload?
How do they, you know, kind of manage those things?
You could even argue it might even be exercise dependent, even muscle dependent as well.
See, sometimes what I do with clients is I say, hey, if we're using A5 GP Max load and be doing
singles, ideally I wanted to get 8 to 10 singles out.
And I might say, look, let's start on 20 seconds or 20 to 30, whatever.
And if you find you're only getting six or seven out with 20 seconds, next workout let's U it to 32.
What did I say?
20?
Let's U it to 30.
OK, you still only get 7 out.
OK, let's go to 40, whatever you need.
Because.
I think that's a really good approach.
I think that's a really good approach.
Start with a target number of repetitions and then figure out what you need in terms of intraset or
inter repetition rest boots to make that happen.
I think that's that's really important because that gives a fixed point for people to work towards.
It's like you can iterate.
Now you can iterate with your rest period duration until you get to that target.
And you may find instruction between muscles.
I find it is.
So for example, if I was going to do like a biceps cluster, I'd probably need a little bit longer.
If I'm doing a calf cluster, something like that, I tend to find a little bit shorter.
So and what I would normally say to clients is what you've identified for that muscle, we're just
going to keep that now, at least for that phase, we're keeping that.
But ideally just ongoing you that's probably going to be a good, good sort of dress period for you
with the calcium iron related fatigue. 1 practical point I wanted to make there.
If I've got an exercise for that muscle later in that workout, ideally you want to sort of mitigate
some of the calcium iron related fatigue.
You talked about direction reserve.
That's where I would do reaction reserve.
And So what I would do then is pick a 5 yard Max load.
I would do singles for me personally, I'll normally do 10 singles, but that's where I'll give myself
like a good 50 seconds, minute, whatever.
I feel like a need and I don't want any one of those singles to feel more than like a closer to than
two reps to failure.
And so I find if I do that, it really that and you know, I get those 10 singles out, I feel like
there's very little fatigue that's accumulated and then I'm still able to go do another exercise for
that muscle and I find my performance isn't jeopardized at all.
No, that makes sense.
I mean, I think again, that's just looking at the context of the rest of the workout in which you're
doing the particular, you know, cluster technique.
So everything always impacts everything else.
So the limitations what, what do we need or what is should one be concerned about or where of if if
they're wanting to use clusters?
I would say the single biggest limitation is the progressive overload.
I would say if you're just doing clusters for a particular exercise, you're always going to be a
little bit uncertain about whether or not you're still using a heavy load because this is the
problem with clusters.
If you drift into the moderate load zone, your value of your cluster starts to drop precipitously
because now you're any repetitions you do at the start of the set, you're just delaying the point to
which you enter the stimulating Rep zone.
So a lot of your extra repetitions that you're gathering by doing the cluster technique, you're not
benefiting from, you know, you really want to be hitting sort of Rep one with a stimulating Rep and
then suddenly your cluster set start to change.
And just to reiterate that point, This is why I think the literature doesn't tell us very much about
clusters because it's all done with moderate, almost all done with moderate loads.
So you're not really benefiting from the early reps of that cluster set and the extra reps you get
by doing clusters aren't helping you.
So I would always kind of, you know, try and program clusters with heavy loads.
And as a result, you need a way of making sure that you're still using a heavy load when you get
halfway through your training program.
And I think that's why we've talked before about maybe with a training program, Maybe if you're
doing full body AB split, only do clusters for one of those two workouts, not both.
And maybe have another workout the other workout in the week.
You do the same exercise, but straight sets or a straight set.
And you can keep, you know, kind of monitoring your what your five rate Max or at least be able to,
I mean, if you're not doing actual five rate Max, you might do it like A7 Rep Max or something, but
have a formula that allows you to just work backwards to that five rate Max and know roughly what to
do.
It should be and that won't be perfect, but working within that close proximity, 7:00 to 5:00 or
8:00 to 5:00, you probably aren't going to be miles away.
And then you can keep on making sure that you are using a fibre Max in your in your work.
And I think that was something that you came up with initially.
And I think it's a brilliant idea.
I think it makes sure that you're always moving forwards and ensuring that you've got your your your
appropriate load for your cluster.
Because repeating what I say is critical that you do use heavy load if you want to make clusters
work, because moderate load's just going to waste your time.
I think over the years to how to track progressive overloading clusters has possibly been the topic
we've talked about, but I don't know if you remember this or realized this.
Yeah, yeah, there might be one of the other topics we've talked about more, but I like even four
years ago, whenever we started talking, I remember the first plan I draw to you was a cluster plan.
And you may not remember this, but it was a full body plan.
And the way I looked at doing it was doing essentially a circuit and doing 8 sets of classes for
each exercise.
And I remember at that point you like, oh, but how do you track progressive overload?
Over the years I've changed the way I track progressive overload with clusters multiple times.
And there's, there's multiple different methods I use.
And at that point in time, what I was using was each phase, what I would do is I would, I would
start the phase with a testing the five year Max and then I would conclude that phase by testing the
five year Max.
And we're using that same load actually that they'd started and then taking that the failure and,
and tracking how much has the five year Max progressed.
And even if there were some drifting away that had happened over those few weeks, they're still
getting at least a set worth of stimulating repetitions.
But you know, that's relying on, you know, you've got a month of however many weeks between these
testing periods.
And I think ideally, what maybe we've settled on over time is having some way that you can anchor
that cluster to a true 5 Rep Max in a shortage duration, not waiting till the next phase or the end
of the phase or a few weeks or whatever.
And so as you've identified there, one option that I really like doing is having an AB and one on
the A, you might be doing clusters.
And on the B, you're doing that same exercise, B, you're doing it for maybe a single set of five or
two sets of five or whatever.
And normally I'll do a single set of five because actually I find if someone's doing a single set,
they tend to actually lift a heavier load than if they're doing 2 sets.
So normally what I would do is a single set of five.
And I'd say, hey, next time you do clusters, you're just going to use the same load using that
workout.
I don't care if it's high or low, whatever you did, but you're just going to use that same load.
And I find that works quite well.
And another method I've used is changing the cluster over each successive workout.
So I start, for example, with a set of five, OK, that's our anchor point.
And then next workout, we might do five sets of two with that load.
And then the next workout, we may actually now do triples, maybe four sets of three.
And the next workout we might do three sets of four.
And the next workout we'll do one set of five again.
And so even if there is a bit of drifting up in terms of strength adaption, by adding repetitions to
that cluster, we're still achieving a similar amount of maximum simulated repetitions.
So there's different ways.
Like what I love about clusters is you can actually get quite creative here.
Like there's not, you know, a one way you need to do this.
If you start thinking about the Physiology, like you said, you can start to come up with cool ways
you can play with them, you can loop, utilize them.
We could track progressive overload in some of these creative ways.
And you know, a lot of people talk about, oh, nothing beats straight sets.
Well, well programmed cluster, I don't know, getting more stimulating repetitions in a straight set
fatigue wise, it's pretty good.
Return on investment, I don't know.
I think it's got a lot of utility.
I agree.
And I think this is a perfect example of something I mentioned a week or so ago when I said, you
know, you're starting to program in a way that has some variety and kind of sort of interesting
features associated with it that actually add value.
I think so many of the programs that I've seen over the years just are variety for the sake of
variety and don't actually beat just hammering away at the same set of exercises, you know, kind of
all the time with the same kind of progression models.
I think this kind of cluster technique when done, you know, alternating a kind of AB style, you
know, is genuinely adding value and also hits the requirement of many clients.
And we have to be honest about this.
I think many clients expect some complexity in their routines if they want to see that because that
for them is perceived value.
Now we can argue that that's just not true, and I don't think it is true.
But for them it is a perceived element of value that they have a complicated routine because that is
seen to be better than a more simple one.
But in this case that you're describing, I think it actually is adding value.
It is actually not not only looking better for them, but also is in fact slightly better for, you
know, the reasons you described a lot better.
Probably not, you know, but it does have that value element that I think is is is missing, missing
in so many other more complicated routines.
I look at a periodized routine and there's things moving around all over the place and it's
impossible to know where the progressive overload is happening and people are changing exercises and
the atrophy is going to be happening and you're going to be missing benefits all over the place from
things that you've done and then not carried on with.
And it's just, you know, kind of absolute nightmare when you're trying to figure out whether there's
anything going on there that's worth worth having.
And you compare that with just a super simple, you know, list of 10 exercises done three times a
week for body styling.
You're like, well, clearly that's going to be way better.
You know, people, people look at it and go, oh, that's a really basic on, you know, kind of an
interesting routine.
And it can't possibly work for me.
And I'm like, seriously, there's very little on the Internet that's better than this for the, for
the goal that you have.
But what you're doing is you're simultaneously making a routine that looks like it has perceived
value from the point of view of many clients, but simultaneously actually does add a little bit of
value on top of what a sort of really basic routine might have.
And I think that sweet spot is extraordinarily interesting for us as we kind of move forward in the
industry as people start to kind of use these physiologically aligned methods of training.
This kind of sort of training is very, very, very interesting to to sort of talk about because it
hits the requirement of many clients simultaneously.
Because just kind of very, very quick digression, you know, a lot of the time when we're talking
about this stuff and we're talking about Physiology based strength training, you know, the people
that are interested in this are, you know, a tiny fraction of the fitness industry and they already
know how strength training works more or less.
And so they're not sort of switched off by a routine that looks simple.
You know, it's like they're just interested in getting results and they just want whatever routine
gets in there.
But many of the people who are then programming for the wider fitness industry or even the general
population, they're working with a different situation.
They're working with people who have different preconceptions, different ideas of what a strength
training program should look like, and they want a different service.
They want to see something that's slightly different because they have these, you know, ideas and
everyone.
We've got to meet everybody where they are.
You can't just expect to go to somebody and say, well, I, I'm telling you that this is right for you
and you've just got to do And some, don't get me wrong, sometimes those relationships can work.
But you know, generally speaking, people have preconceptions and they want to, you know, kind of see
some of those met when they, when they receive a training program.
And I think this, that's why this is really interesting, because it actually does fit those.
Yeah, definitely.
There's a big sort of psychological component to that.
And I think in, in my experience as a coach, what I've identified is when one is working one-on-one
with a client, and especially if that the client has sought you out as a coach.
And if you're working in a gym, the gym just just assigned to a client, it's different.
But if a client sort you out, a they sort of have that trust process there.
They sort of, you know, believe you to be an expert anyway and be in a one-on-one context.
You're able to spend a little bit more time educating.
And like, for me, I know when I was doing my one on ones in person, I don't do in person anymore.
Most of that session between sets, like we're just, we're just educating.
We're just talking about like, actually, hey, how does this work?
How does programming work?
What's the Physiology?
And in that context, you might be able to give that client, you know, that sort of basic program
you've explained.
But where you struggle to do that as a coach is if you're doing 1 to many and you're coaching a
group or you've got an online group or whatever that might be, and you don't have that opportunity
to really educate each individual client.
That's where I've found people might jump into one, one of my groups from another group and I'm like
Hannah hard.
I know my programming is a lot better than what they came from.
And they'll be like, oh, but that we're doing, you know, three different rotations and like 6
different workouts rotating every two weeks and this and the other.
And like, man, that was so cool.
I'm going to go back to that.
It's like, man, there's, you know, there's, there's a disconnect here and it's hard to bridge that.
And you know, you can always direct people to more information and podcasts and whatever else like
you said there, if we can, if we can deal with that issue before it even arises by actually having a
value add, that is what they expect.
It's not even an issue in the 1st place.
So I do find that there's a lot of value in this, for what it's worth, Clusters.
I'm not like the cluster guy, so I'll program clusters.
Probably maybe 30 to 50% of my programs will have clusters.
So with my groups, I'd say maybe yeah, every second or third phase will have some clusters in there.
Certainly not every exercise, usually one, maybe 2 exercises and a workout.
So like you said, you know, do they, are they exponentially more valuable than straight sets?
Well, no, but there's creative ways we can use them to actually be beneficial.
And I know that we're getting a little bit long here, so I don't want to sort of divert us too much.
But one way I do also use them, and we've touched on this in the past is when I program a cluster, I
say, hey, I want you to be as explosive as possible.
I want you to have as much, you know, sort of intent in that repetition as you can.
And I might even instruct clients use an internal focus in that actual set as well rather than an an
external focus.
And I'll actually utilize that cluster as a way of increasing Modi unit recruitment in that phase.
And then we might go away from clusters next phase, but we'll have some of that carry over adaption
from hopefully increasing Modi unit recruitment as well.
So we can actually use it to achieve different goals or different adaptions that we might not be
able to get just with a normal straight set.
Absolutely.
I think the interesting thing there when you first, when you first came to me and suggested that,
that was a, an interesting strategy and I kind of sat there and I did what I did, which is where I
think through all of the ramifications.
And I was like, that's a really interesting idea because you're already losing progressive overload
capacity with clustered more or less anyway.
And that's the single biggest problem with internal focus is that you lose progressive overload
visibility because you can't really do, you know, kind of progressive overload and have an internal
focus for multiple reasons.
I mean, obviously, firstly, it just disconnects your expectation for how many repetitions you're
going to get with your capacity to do repetitions because you're focusing on squeezing the muscle
instead of getting the repetitions out.
But secondly, if you do try and get back out to that mentality and start seeking sort of a target,
like say for example, you look at your logbook and you go, oh, I did 8 reps last time with an
internal focus, attention, I need to get 9 reps this time.
Your brain immediately starts to lose the ability to do the internal focus because trying to hit the
target is an external focus really is an external focus kind of drive.
It is not itself an external focus attention, but it is going to push you to use an external focus
attention because that's the best way of making sure that you get additional repetition.
So so you can't, you actually can't really do kind of internal focus and progressive overload focus
at the same time not focus.
You can't seek progressive overload at the same time as using an internal focus.
They're actually completely disparate ideas.
But because clusters are not focusing on progress below anyway, they're just giving you the
repetitions and saying go ahead and do the these repetitions.
I think it means that you're not losing very much when you do that.
So again, a fantastic example of how when you understand what Physiology is doing in each of these
different scenarios, when you understand what Physiology is, how Physiology is working in the
context of focus of attention and in terms of clusters and what progressive overview actually is.
When you understand the meaning of these things and what's actually happening, you can play around
with this stuff and start to connect dots and do things where you previously, because I've never
programmed an internal focus with attention, just never.
And I never really thought about ever doing that because I just wanted to make sure progressive
overload was always happening.
But then when you have a reason to do a cluster and you now kind of are sort of pegging it with a,
an alternate, an alternate workout where progress whether it is happening.
So, you know, you've always got that sort of structure in place and suddenly, but suddenly the, the
internal focus of attention becomes interesting again.
But you only knew that because of the Physiology telling you how things worked.
It's just, it's so, so fascinating the way that we can start to make connections and introduce
concepts and play around with stuff again.
You know, sometimes people will try and pigeonhole you and go, you know, oh, you've always said that
internal focus is not a good idea.
But now suddenly you're saying it's OK.
Well, you were trying to pigeonhole me or the, the person who was saying that was trying to
pigeonhole way by saying that these are your opinions and you must always stand by them.
And I'm like, no, Physiology is what matters.
How you play around with that Physiology in the constant restraining strength training program is,
is, is is up to you.
But it's the Physiology that is the important bit.
How you connect those dots and structure those programs is, is entirely up to you within the
context.
And if you find a way to make that work and physiologically it makes sense, that's fantastic.
Just because I didn't think of it doesn't matter.
I think the one who's, who's programming, even if someone's programming for themself, I, I thought
this about exercise selection and, and rotating workouts and AB versus a A and stuff like that.
And I've always thought if you're not that, I don't want to say knowledgeable, but really that's
kind of what I'm getting at it.
If you don't know this stuff super well, it's a lot easier just to keep it really simple and just
do, you know, a, a, a or just sort of programming in a sort of not lowest common denominator, but
there's the simplest way possible and it's really hard to mess that up.
Like when you're programming just, you know, a, a, a full body straight sets, you can't really mess
it up as long as you've got, you're following some pretty basic parameters.
And as you said there, once you start to understand the Physiology more, that's where I think you
can start to, you know, expand out and start to get more creative and play some of these things.
And I don't think one's better than the other.
Like I think if that's where you're at, I would encourage coaches who are listening to this, if
you're not comfortable with your Physiology, program in a simple way, because your simple program is
going to be better than you attempting to program in a complex way.
Yeah, absolutely.
I would say that and, and, and I would say that 90% of the time I'm just programming either full
body A, a, a or full body AB.
Even for me, I'm, you know, I don't go more complicated than that.
You know, I just don't see the value in it doesn't need to be, you know, I think, you know, you're
going to get 95% of the possible benefits that you could possibly get from either full body A or
full body AB.
Maybe you can squeak out an extra 5% here and there with some clever programming.
But you know, when I see how much effort you put in to these programs and how much time you spend
trying to figure out how to add these complexities, I think probably the return on investment for a
single person probably isn't there.
You know, you're programming for a group of people, a large group of people.
I can see the ROI makes sense in that situation because you've got a large number of people who are
benefiting from these.
But if you're really just looking at a single person like I am, most of the time just isn't.
I just don't see the value in that complexity.
It doesn't.
Make sense?
Yeah, it's not necessary.
I just like trouble solving like this is how I get to sleep at night.
I'll just be playing with the Physiology thing.
What if I did it like this?
So what if I programmed it this way and then hopefully I remembered in the morning so I can talk to
you about it.
But if it's not something that someone's you know he's super passionate about, interested in, keep
it simple.
Yeah, I think there's there's so much value in the simple programs that we've talked about on this
podcast, either just literally the programs that were being done in the Silver era or Physiology
based programs which are incredibly similar to those programs with some tweaks around mainly
exercise selection or also repetition range.
We tend to go for heavier loading protocols, but again, that's logistical most of the time.
I don't think it's a sort of a fundamental difference.
I think it's just a logistical 1 and but really there's incredible overlap between those two things,
which is really the purpose of this podcast as it always happened.
Hopefully that's cleared up everyone's questions and classes.
It's it's a hot topic.
I know I certainly get a stack of questions and classes and I'm sure you do, no doubt so.
And it's something I feel like maybe we've sat on a little while, like we haven't really talked
about it much.
I know people have wanted us to talk about it.
So, you know, hopefully that sort of empowered you guys to think about it and, and know how to
program it and what the benefits are and what maybe some of the shortcomings are and, and how you
can utilize it for yourself or clients or whatever else.
I'm excited to actually see what you guys come up with it with, you know, out of this and and you
know, obviously I've just given some examples of how I program it, but there's if you understand the
Physiology, there's a whole stack different ways you could use it.
So hopefully we'll see some examples popping up on TikTok and instant seeing how you guys are
running with this.
But, and that's our goal here is to discuss the Physiology so you guys can play with it and actually
know how does this stuff actually work in real life and how do you get the most out of it.