Episode: 014 Training Frequency - What the long-term studies actually show
URL: https://open.spotify.com/episode/08flme4grVd2CLIvKHd1Yv
Published: 2025-08-25
================================================================================

Hello, welcome back to another episode.
Now, Chris, I was thinking this week, and I'm not going to I'm not going to do the polite thing.
I'd be like, hey, do you listen to any podcasts?
Because I know that you probably don't.
I'm just going to assume that you don't.
And I don't particularly listen to a lot of podcasts either, but I was listening to 1 and I, I
realized it's a normal thing for podcasts to do like introductions and have like a song and do like
this small talk and talk about people's week.
And I realized, man, that is not at all how we do our podcasts.
So if you, if you're like used to normal podcasts and you're expecting like a bit of a, you know,
here's what we've been doing in our lives and everything, then I understand this is probably not the
normal podcast for you, but I'll try to give you a little bit of it.
So Chris, how are you doing this week?
I'm doing very well.
Thanks Jake.
I don't have any more details to add, but I'm doing very well.
There we go that's that box ticked.
Okay, let's let's jump into it.
I have a plan to talk you guys over.
Now the plan itself is interesting.
I actually think the context of the plan is the most interesting bit.
Now, Chris, you don't know this, so this is the information for you.
But this plan, it does come from, it comes to someone who most people will not be aware of because
he never actually won Miss America or Miss Universe.
But this was Floyd Page.
He can look up Floyd Page.
He compete in the 40s and 50s, early 50s.
And he did have an amazing physique.
He did place, I forget what he placed, but he did performed quite well in Mr. America competitions.
But you know, a very well developed bodybuilder of that time.
And this plan that I'm going to talk through of his, this is quoted as his favorite routine.
Now this actually came from a magazine published in 1952 is Weeda magazine, your physique magazine.
And what was interesting in this magazine is they actually, as much as, you know, we can believe it
because obviously we did just love a little bit of marketing.
They actually listed out several bodybuilders who placed in that recent Mr. America competition and
they listed out their routines and they kind of looked at or or briefly outlined some of the
similarities.
And it's interesting just as a audience memo agreed to actually look at those and compare, well,
what are these people doing that's similar?
What are they doing that's different?
And so they had people like Ridge Park and Steve Reeves.
And we've actually talked about the Steve Reeves plan on this podcast.
And in fact, that's really interesting part as well because one of the things that waiter was
massive on was sets.
So waiter was really kind of competing with Bob Hoffman, who Bob Hoffman would kind of say he did
the set system, but he kind of did invite different exercises for the same muscle and wasn't as like
sometimes he would do multiple sets, but it wasn't like a big feature of his style of training.
And So what weed is doing in this magazine is saying, look, all these people are using sets.
They're all big on sets.
This thing works.
And what's so fascinating about that is we've gone over the Steve Reeves plan and Steve didn't do
sets.
In fact, in this magazine, this literal magazine, he didn't do sets.
He did a single set, but he just did multiple exercises.
And so it's interesting that that kind of idea, sets is somewhat synonymous actually with just doing
more exercises for the same muscle.
So I think that's an interesting piece of like historical context where it's like sets doesn't
always mean multiple sets of the same exercise.
In that context, it could actually mean different exercises, same muscle.
Anyway, bit of a tangent.
So this particular plan, Floyd page, it was again full body.
One more quick tangent.
All of the plans that they outlined were either full body or, and this is quite interesting, they
did, there was one or two that were splits and one was almost a growth split, but he did it and I'm
we'll probably talk about this at some point, but he actually trained morning and evening on
consecutive days.
And so he managed to do his growth split over 2 days.
And so he's actually still training with a frequency where each muscle was trained to be 72 hours or
48 hours or whatever it was.
So it's interesting that even when they were using splits, they realize, hey, actually frequency
still matters, but that's a topic for another day.
So if Floyd page full body three times per week, as was the standard.
And he suggested starting with two sets of eight to 10 repetitions for each of these exercises.
Now you did say after you're cast into it and you've been doing it for a while, you can add a set.
And he said if you want you can add more sets.
But he said never go above 5 sets.
That in and of itself is actually fairly interesting as well because that's something you do
regularly see where people will say or start with two or three sets if you want to add, you can, but
never do more than five.
I've heard many bodybuilders in the silver area say never do more than 5.
So there's obviously something that they were finding out there that they thought this was a ceiling
for people.
So we start with a wide grip bench and we move into an incline dumbbell fly into a bent arm pullover
using a barbell into dips.
So parallel bar dips into incline dumbbell curls, which were a pretty popular exercise at this time,
into a seated dumbbell triceps extension.
So single arm triceps extension overhead into a dumbbell concentration curl single arm, a bent over
barbell row.
Now we almost have a lap pull down.
I thought you'd be happy to see this, but it's not really.
It's not a frontal plane lat pull down.
It is a a narrow grip and it's actually like a high to low.
So the pulley is is starting in the top position and you're pulling it down into the waist height as
a more like a diagonal lat pull down.
And then we've got a single armed dumbbell overhead press, which again was a fairly popular epic
exercise at the time.
A barbell behind the neck overhead press and then toe press on a leg press contraption and either a
squat or a leg press.
You said you could choose either 1.
So we've got how many exercises there?
I think it's 12 exercises.
So that that was also a commonality.
We saw people usually using 8 to 12, sometimes up to 20 plus like Steve, but that's a very obviously
common kind of pattern as well.
So Chris thought.
Well, in some ways it, as you say, fits relatively well with the examples that we've seen
previously.
Three times a week they're using moderate loads, 8 to 10 reps per set and it's a full body routine.
So you know fits relatively well with a lot of other examples that we've already seen.
Obviously, yes, I'm very happy to see.
I mean, sagittal plane sort of high, low row is kind of the same thing really as a sagittal plane
row or a sagittal plane pull down.
Really.
I mean, they're all kind of doing the same thing as far as the lats concerned.
There's no real differences there.
Pair that with your sort of barbell bent over a row and yeah, you do have, you do have kind of 2/3
of what you would want for kind of fall back development.
I mean, just missing frontal plane there.
I mean, I know that people are yet again sort of questioning this, you know, idea that, you know,
you need different exercises to train different parts of the lats.
Just today we were talking, somebody was making the case that, you know, EMG data they believed
shows that the entire LAT is activated in any pulling exercise.
Well it's not the EMG data I'm looking at, you know, I'm looking at EMG data 2 separate studies that
show very profound regional differences in LAT activation that track perfectly with the moment arms.
So I find it weird when people literally say there isn't data and I'm like, well, what am I looking
at then, you know, are we living on the same planet?
You know?
So anyway, we've got some good exercise selection there for back.
I wouldn't say it's perfect, but it's definitely better than some of the others that we've seen.
Interestingly, what we have got here is a little bit of doubling up on the overhead pressing.
So this is something that goes all the way back to the sundown type era routine that we started with
or a little bit later than sundown.
But that kind of emphasis on overhead pressing is starting to creep back a little bit here, but
perhaps just because of personal preferences or targeting muscles that he felt were important to
him.
In fact, in this magazine, this exact magazine, I believe he's just one.
Anyway, Steve actually comments on on that shift away from Sandhouse physique saviors and discusses
how at this point, what is perceived as desirable and bodybuilding has now shifted away from
Sandhouse physique.
And he actually names that, which is an interesting progression.
And you know, there's there's that tendency that you've pointed out a couple of times, which is to
select a number of exercises for the same kind of body area and body part and get that variety.
Like we've got the wide grip bench, we've got a dumbbell fly.
Now.
I wouldn't have picked those two to contrast each other.
I think they're doing almost the same thing really.
And then you got the bent pullover, which is probably a pretty good lower test exercise done a
narrow grip bench then that would be perfect.
So that that trio of exercises for training the pecs, narrow grip bench would do clavicular really,
really well.
A lot of people think that it's the incline that makes the clavicular PEC kind of targeted by bench
pressing.
It's not.
It's the narrow grip that you want.
You want to change to a plane grip that there's much, much more for isolate, not isolating because
there's no such thing.
But for targeting the clavicular PEC, you want that sort of narrow grip.
But yeah, that that trio is getting towards being a really nice trio for.
Doing the fly in that incline position versus doing the fly flat, what difference are we seeing
there?
Honestly, I think you might see a little bit of a shift towards clavicular, but not very much.
Honestly, I think that the transverse versus size to plane is the thing that really matters.
So if people are doing a transverse plane kind of exercise like a wide grip bench or a wide grip
fly, that is really going to primarily, and I would say primarily very minimally, it's going to be a
little bit more emphasis on the middle Peck, the sternal Peck, and it's going to do a reasonable job
of activating quite a lot of the and coastal to target the curriculum much more.
You would want a sagittal plane movement.
Really.
Yeah, a little bit of an incline is not going to hurt.
But the major difference is going to be that that plane of motion and honestly, plane of motion
really is one of the biggest factors.
That's where we see the differences in the lats, for example, with plane of motion.
Obviously we've got, you know, a couple of exercises for triceps.
We've got, I think we do have two.
Yeah, we've got two different biceps curl exercises now.
We've got the a variety of lat exercises.
As regards the overhead pressing, it doesn't look particularly varied to me unless there was a.
Slight single.
Often they do that single.
I'm a little bit more sagittal.
OK.
Well that would be interesting then.
So that'll give you a bit more anterior dealt probably.
And then obviously, you know, standard kind of calf training, again, focusing on the, you know, the
gastrope there and then obviously, you know, squat.
So again, if I were to look at it and go what's missing, I would probably say the same thing that
I've been saying throughout the entirety of this series of podcasts that we've done, which is I'm
not seeing very much hamstrings work, which they could have done with a stiff leg.
I'm not seeing that, that wide grip pull down, which I would expect to see as well.
Anything else would be a limitation of the time and the equipment.
You know, I'm not obviously seeing a rec fem exercise.
I'm not seeing, you know, sort of stuff that would be more suited to that cause sort of multi joint,
sorry, 2 joint muscle in sort of single joint exercises, but that's an equipment issue.
Yeah, we know.
We're using iron boots to try to do leg extensions.
They didn't have machines.
Definitely a limitation for sure.
It is interesting.
Really underscores just how similar a lot of these programs were.
If we're finding the same issues in many of them, it kind of just underscores how.
Yeah, it does.
It does what I do find interesting and I'm trying to work out why this is is half of them.
Do use a stiff leg deadlift half of them?
Do you kind of wonder whether people are dropping them out because of some kind of concern about the
exercise, or maybe they just don't like it, or who knows, but it might be that there's another
reason for it dropping out.
And one thing that just came to me actually with that is you've probably seen some of the first
straps that people were using.
I think Hepburn was one of the first people behind using those, and they wouldn't have been common
at this time.
And I have heard a lot of these bodybuilders talk about training grip so that you could do these
other exercises.
So maybe that's the limitation where people were just finding that doing something like a stiff
deadlift was just too much load to actually hold, and maybe that was a limitation.
Interesting idea.
I mean that would that would require us really, I think to eliminate a number of possibilities that
I'm not historically capable of.
As in I just don't know the history well enough to be able to even comment on it.
But, you know, alternating grip is not difficult to use and pretty much eliminates almost all grip
issues unless you are literally absurdly strong.
And yeah, I mean, there's, there's, there's, there's issues there.
I'd be like I I'm not.
I'm not educated enough on the history to know what those what.
What the limitations might have been?
Yeah, but you know, I mean, clearly you're right there.
There's, we do see those stiff leg deadlifts appearing occasionally, but they're not routine.
And the question is then, is there a reason why they're getting dropped out?
Is it because people, is it that they were doing them and they just didn't write them in because of
some reason, because they didn't want?
I don't know.
I mean, I'd be actually.
Just there's so many possibilities because that's another one you see sometimes people.
But here's the plan.
And then of course they do deadly.
Send me now and then it's like, okay, well, why don't you put it in there?
Yeah, interesting.
And you know, then there's also the question of, like I just mentioned, Steve, he's talked about how
the physique, the desirable physique could move beyond what Sandow had.
And, and what he emphasizes is chest.
And so maybe there's part of it which is like, well, we just don't really care about hams and cars
were usually undervalued as well.
So maybe it was just upper body heavy and that's what people are looking for.
So let's move on.
OK, What are we talking about today?
So we're going to talk a little bit about training frequency as a somewhat hot topic at the moment.
And we'll probably, I mean, we were just chatting about how we might structure this discussion and
how it might fit into future podcasts.
I think we'll probably end up doing a couple of podcasts on frequency, how they'll get structured.
And I don't think we've we've fully figured out.
But what we're going to do today is give a little bit of background to what physiologically we think
is happening with training frequency, just so that anybody who is new to this topic can at least set
it in context of how it works.
And then talk a little bit about the long term training studies, because there has been a trend for
a couple of fitness influences to start making the point that or start arguing the case, I should
say, not making the point to start arguing in the case that the long term training day to say
something different from what the Physiology would predict.
And I just want to kind of reject that and point out that that's not really what the long term
training day to say at all.
So let me start at the very beginning by just giving a little bit of context and saying what we
think we should find when we approach the concept of training frequency.
So training frequency in the context of bodybuilding refers to how often you're training a muscle
per week.
So this is really important just to start out because if you've come to this discussion from say S&C
or more sort of the wider parts of the fitness industry, you might think that training frequency
means how many times a week you go to the gym.
And that's not what we're talking about.
So sometimes this can catch people out when they first come into the space and start having
conversations.
They're like, what does this mean?
How many times I'm going to the gym?
No, no, no, no.
It actually means how many times a week training a muscle.
So starting from that point of view, so basically we're thinking about training frequency.
And what's going to happen is you're going to train a muscle and it's going to experience a
stimulus.
And that stimulus is going to take a period of time to be processed.
And then after that period of time is finished, the sort of the muscle will then be in an
unstimulated state again.
So you'll have like a what we call a stimulus period.
And then when that finishes, you're going to a state of not being stimulated.
Now Physiology tells us that muscle fibers are always either growing or shrinking.
You can't have a state where the muscle fibre just sits there doing nothing that that doesn't exist.
So essentially the muscle fibres are either growing or shrinking and they're kind of either what
we'd say either anabolic or catabolic.
And so essentially over the course of the week, you're going to have periods of time in which the
muscles are or the muscle fibres in the muscle are growing and then periods of time in which they're
shrinking.
And So what we can say is that your training program will produce hopefully net hypertrophy over the
week.
So we use the word net to indicate that you've had some hypertrophy in some parts of the week and
some atrophy in other parts of the week.
Now perhaps in a later podcast, we can tackle the actual rates of atrophy and talk about that.
I'm not going to go into too much detail right now, but we do know that you do have a period of
hypertrophy and the period of atrophy because if you look at maintenance studies and there's no such
thing as a maintenance stimulus that this exists because as I say, fibers are rather growing or
shrinking.
So what you have is a maintenance workout will essentially give you enough hypertrophy to equal out
the atrophy later in the week and you end up with net zero across the week.
So hypertrophy equals atrophy and you end up with maintenance.
So you can have, it's got some really nice studies, 6 month long studies showing that you know, kind
of one workout of 3 or 4 that's each week is like giving you a hypertrophy stimulus then Nets to 0
at the end of the week because the atrophy equals the hypertrophy.
So just in case anyone's questioning this, at this point, if someone, if someone's not in the gym,
they've never gone to the gym, we're not saying they're going to be atrophying, just normally,
right?
Like what we're, well, I mean, technically there will be, but what we're saying is they're
maintaining the amount of muscle mass they have because they are still in fact getting a stimulus.
They're just not getting that stimulus in the gym.
The Guinea stimulus from the daily activity and this stimulus that they're getting from the daily
activity is enough to grow the muscle to the point that they currently have.
And that is how they are maintaining in quotes the amount of muscle mass they currently have.
Exactly, which is why if somebody breaks an arm or a leg and they have the arm or leg put in a cast
and it doesn't move, then what happens when you take the cast off, say 567 weeks later or however
long it takes?
Then the limb has shrunk down.
Now you don't need to do anything to get the muscle to grow back to how it was.
You just go back into your normal way of life and it magically goes back to how it was because
you're loading it in everyday life.
And this actually just a very, very brief physiological interlude, but this actually shows you why
hypertrophy is muscle fiber specific.
Because ultimately if you move sort of across the room, you go to collect something, you come back,
you fetch a book, you walk into another room, you walk up some stairs, you walk down some stairs.
While you're doing those slow movements, the muscle fibers that are being used in those situations
are being loaded very, very highly because the force velocity relationship allows you to produce
very high forces in those fibers.
So that's your growth stimulus.
People are, how can I get a growth stimulus from walking across the room?
Well, it's like, well, if you're not understanding that you don't actually understand anything about
hypertrophy because the stimulus hypertrophy is on a fiber level and the forced to lost
relationship, the movement, slow movement you're doing allows the high loading that then causes
those fibers to grow.
So whatever fibers you use on a daily basis, unless you literally sort of almost teleport across the
room every time you move, unless you move at really fast speeds all the time, you're guaranteed to
get a slow speed movement somewhere.
And as a result, you're going to get hypertrophy happening in the fibers that you're activating.
And that's why we end up with this low level of this level of muscle mass, which is just like what
we have from moving around and why some people who have a little bit more physically active life or
maybe they do manual labor or whatever they're doing in their life that just has a little bit more
level of kind of force requiring force producing requirements.
They're a little bit more muscular just because.
If you were to wear like, you might invest.
Or if you were to wear a weighted vest and you were to walk up and down stairs, and you'd find that
you started to increase muscle mass as a result of doing that, and people would go, how is that
possible?
You know, I'm not producing high levels of effort.
You said that hypertrophy occurs with high levels of effort.
And I'm like, yeah, well, maximum hypertrophy is going to happen with maximum levels of effort
because you're hitting as many muscle fibers as you've got access to.
But that doesn't mean that you're not going to get hypertrophy at lower levels of effort.
It's just you're reducing the number of fibers that you're exposing into that stimulus.
So basically then what we've got is this net hypertrophy concept where we've got hypertrophy
happening in being processed in the stimulus period.
And then you're losing a little bit of muscle mass towards the back end of the week when you're not
doing that workout.
If if that's how your frequency is working.
And then of course, you end up with the net hypertrophy at the end of the week.
So first important concept to understand from a physiological point of view whenever you're thinking
about frequency is that you've got these periods of time in which the muscle is growing and you've
got periods of time in which the muscle is not growing, it's actually shrinking very slightly.
And if you have a low enough frequency like once per week, then you can have this situation where
you'll get to the end of the week and you're actually netting out.
So it's that your three sets on Monday, as we've said, or four sets on Monday is used up by the end
of the week and you end up with a net zero situation.
Now of course, one of the things that then becomes very contentious is how long is that stimulus
period.
Now we have done a podcast on that very concept and I think it was one of our very first podcasts
and we'll probably have to do another one on it again because it continues to be a contentious
concept.
But I'm not going to go into that now because I'm just presenting the conceptual basis for
understanding training frequency.
The next thing you need to be aware of is this idea that hyper is dose responsive to volume.
In other words, that's a fancy way of saying that you do more volume, you get more hypertrophy.
But the important thing about that dose response is it's nonlinear.
It actually has diminishing returns.
So each extra set you do in a workout has a slightly or quite a lot less impact on the hypertroid
that you get from the workout.
So most of the hypertroid really is coming from the first set and incrementally a lot less
sequential sets.
And it probably does plateau somewhere.
And again, we can really dive into that data at another time and start talking about exactly where
we think that plateau might happen.
I would actually probably find that quite interesting because it hasn't been something I've looked
at for probably about a year or so.
So what we say then is the second idea is that the hypertrophy that you get from a workout is
responsive in a non linear way.
And that now means that you cannot say that you allocate your sets anywhere you like across the week
and get the same amount of hypertrophies.
For example, you can't do three sets on Monday and say that equals one set on Monday, Wednesday and
Friday.
And just let me reiterate, this has got nothing.
This is a separate concept to the hypertrophy, atrophy concept, totally separate.
Yeah.
So what we're talking about here is a completely separate idea.
That means that a higher frequency is going to be different from a lower frequency, not just because
we've got the atrophy, hypertrophy issues going on, but because we're getting a different amount of
stimulus from each set in a workout if it's positioned in a different place.
So if I position my set first, I do three first sets a week.
I'm going to get a totally different magnitude of stimulus from if I do all three sets on a Monday.
So unless, So what you're saying is unless you were doing a second set in a workout of of an
exercise, unless that second set produce as much muscle as a first set, then obviously frequency is
going to matter.
Like splitting screening that volume across every day is going to matter unless there's exactly the
same amount of muscle growth in that second set, then the first set.
And we have ample data to suggest actually that's not how that works, and there's very clear
diminishing returns.
Yeah.
So we've got 2 recent metro analysis.
We've got Brad Schemfels Metro analysis from quite a few years ago now and we've got the recent one
by Pelland and both of those metro analysis clearly show a non linear dose response, a nice curve.
Now they have different shaped curves and we can again when we talk about dose response again in the
future, we can dive into that and explain why we think that difference might exist.
The point is though that both are non linear and if you have a non linear curve, you are saying that
your second set is smaller stimulus in your first set, your third is smaller than your second, and
so on and so on and so on.
Now again, you can, you know, argue the magnitude of that effect and that's totally fine.
But no matter what, the magnitude doesn't matter the magnitude if that non linear relationship
exists, which it does.
And actually physiologically, you'd predict that it would because you've got fatigue occurring from
set to set, which reduces the level of recruitment, reduces the level of mechanical tension.
Then you've probably also got what we, what we call a saturation of stimulus.
So you get a really big stimulus from the first because you've got nothing going on at the time.
And then you try and stimulate a bit more and it's like, well, how much more can you really
stimulate when you've already applied a large stimulus?
So you don't get as much stimulus for the second time simply from a SIM, from a stimulus point of
view and the capacity to produce that stimulus in addition to the fatigue that's happening.
So physiologically, this nonlinear dose response makes perfect sense and it's exactly what we would
expect.
So you've got these two really important concepts.
You've got the the hypertrophy and atrophy effects going on and you've got this non linear dish
response.
And if you have been following along, you should notice that both of these are telling you that
higher frequency is going to beat the socks of lower frequency.
You just can't get away from that.
The the question really only is, you know, what's the upper limit on frequency?
Can I train every 5 minutes?
I mean, it's like, you know, reduce it to the absurd level.
No, obviously we can't.
But you know that that conversation is something that requires a lot of digging into the data to
understand what it might be.
But broadly speaking, if we can get the fatigue out of the way, because we mentioned before fatigue
is a big problem for triggering stimulus, If we can get the fatigue out of the way, then, you know,
we're probably in a good place to be able to stimulate hypertrophy again.
So that's really where the limitations come in.
Now, again, we can go into what, you know, the role of my OPS being elevated from a previous workout
plays what role that plays.
We're going to talk about that again in more detail, but just I'm hoping to give people a framework
that they can start from physiologically and we can use that to talk about training features.
Does that make sense?
Yeah, I think it's really clear.
So if one were budgeting to go on a holiday, you've got two options.
You can either look at how much money is coming in, you can work more hours, you can get a second
job, or you can look at how much money is going out.
You can start eating out less, cutting back on expense sensors.
That's the same way that muscle curl is working.
We can look at how much muscle we're actually building, stimulating the growth of, and then we can
look at how much muscle we're losing atrophying over that period of time.
And the net growth is ultimately a combination of those two factors.
And you're saying both of those.
Ultimately the answer to both of those is high frequency.
We just need to work out how high that frequency can be.
Yeah.
So where we've got these two concepts, we've got the atrophy, hypertrophy side of things, how much
are we losing by not being in this stimulus period?
And we've got this dose response effect, which is telling us that if we position the sets of
different times in a week, we'll get a better response than doing all together.
Actually kind of like, you know, when the social media marketers tell you and they say, look, you
need to space your posts out across the week so you get a better response because every time you do
a separate post on a different day, you get a good response.
If you try to do all three posts a week that you're going to post and you do them all in 5 minutes
on a Monday, you're not going to get the same benefit.
And it's kind of like that's the kind of idea that we're talking about with those responses.
Like the algorithms don't favor you if you post everything at the same time.
So we've got these two ideas.
We've got that Physiology is telling us we should be aware of and they're pushing us towards this
idea that higher frequency is better.
Now, obviously I've kind of created a weekly net stimulus model which takes these concepts into
account and it allows you to to vary them according to what you think the numbers might be.
And I give guidelines for what I think they probably are.
But you can use that calculator to, you know, sort of figure out what, what, what, what, what
training frequencies are like when you compare them and see which training frequencies are slightly
better.
And the data that, you know, I've seen when playing with this model based on this physiological
concept, these physiological concepts shows that, you know, sort of broadly speaking, three times is
better than 2 * 2 times is better than one times a week.
Broadly speaking, if you're using the same number of sets for a muscle per week, 3 is going to be
better than two, 2 is going to be better than one.
And that's, that's the concept that I've been arguing with the weekly net stimulus model with the
ideas that we've just walked through as a basis.
Now, as I say, we can dive in and talk about those in much more detail later on, but just
fundamentally, that's where we're at.
So that brings us then to this kind of topic that I wanted to sort of discuss today, which is that
some fitness influencers have started arguing back and saying we don't think your physiologically
aligned model is valid because we think that the long term training studies that have been done on
training frequency don't agree with that model.
And I'm like, OK, well, let's look at the training studies that we've got and see whether that's
true.
So depending on when you're listening to this podcast, if you're listening to this podcast shortly
after it was first published, then you'll be able to look at my Instagram and see a list of these
studies straight away because it's the Last Post I did.
I did, I posted it earlier today.
And what I did was I started with the metro analysis or actually it's a network analysis because
they used a slightly different type of statistical analysis than I'm accustomed to seeing.
And it's called a network analysis doesn't really matter.
And I started with that list of studies that this research group used for that for their study
because that metro analysis is the one that people are tending to refer to when they're talking
about these frequency studies.
Essentially, I went to that metro analysis is called Courier 2023.
And I went to that that study and I downloaded the list of studies that they incorporated in the
metro analysis and I went and I looked for all the frequency studies.
Now I'm just going to make a very quick comment on what that metro analysis did just so that people
understand what's going on.
So the metro analysis had I think about 120, a 119 separate hypertrophy studies in it.
Now only about 16 of those were actually frequency studies.
So you've got 119 hypertrophy studies, which sounds like a really big number.
So when people say, oh, you know, look at this metro analysis, it had 119 hypertrophy studies in and
they found this answer about training frequency.
Therefore, we should, you know, accept that as a, as an answer or a, a source of data.
As I say, only 16 were comparisons between different training frequencies.
The vast majority, like 87 or so percent of the studies incorporated in that network analysis were
actually studies that didn't measure differences in training frequency.
Maybe they measured differences in, you know, repetition range or volume or whatever else, or maybe
they just had one training group.
I mean, a lot of the studies when I was going through the list, a lot of them just had one training
group and one control.
So what I did was I grabbed the 16 studies that just measured the difference in training frequency
and I went through them and I excluded stuff that was DEXA or, you know, kind of not sort of a
direct measurement of, of hyper.
I just want MRI, ultrasound, that kind of stuff, CT.
And that got me down to 9 and I looked at it and I thought that's a bit strange because was it 9 or
was it 8?
I can't remember.
I looked, I thought that's a bit strange because I thought there was a Shern felt frequency study
that compared one and three times a week.
And there is, I mean, and it wasn't on that list and I don't know why.
I mean, I, I didn't look at the exclusion criteria to figure out why.
So it just wasn't there.
And I also noticed that there was another one that was missing, which is probably the date because
the Neve's paper on frequency was published in 22.
And if this study got finally published in 23, there's probably just an overlap in terms of dates.
So I don't know why the scheme for got omitted, but I can understand why the Neve's got omitted
because the dates didn't probably allow them to have access to that paper at the point when they
submitted it to peer review.
So that ended up with, as I say, around about 10 or 11 studies and I kind of just put them in a
table and that gave me comparisons between 1:00 and 2:00, two and three and one and three.
And I excluded stuff that was comparing like one and five and you know, two and five and stuff
because, you know, really most people want to know the answer between, you know, what are we, what
do we know about the, the famous 3 frequencies for training a muscle, which is 1-2 and three.
And no, there's no data for every other day.
We just don't have that kind of data in the literature.
So I kind of ended up with only about 10 studies that direct hypertrophy measurements.
Now, that was my process for getting that list.
I did not do an exhaustive literature review of the entire pub Med system to see if I'd missed
anything.
I did double check from my notes in the past and I couldn't see anything that I'd missed.
But if you're listening to this podcast and you've seen the post on Instagram and you've gone, Oh
well, why didn't you include X study?
Please send it to me.
I would love to to add it in.
And that was my process so that you understand that I went through a process that was largely
independent of my own biases.
I started from the metro analysis that I'd been shown the kind of results of and that was being used
to argue that training frequency studies didn't agree with the physiological model.
So I started with my opponents arguments, data source if you like.
Does that make sense?
Yeah, absolutely.
So, so I ended up with these studies and basically what I found was about I think sort of more or
less 3 or 4 studies for each comparison, you know, 1 and 2, two and three and one and three.
And essentially there was no differences, no significant differences using the statistical term.
There are no significant differences between 1:00 and 2:00 or between 2:00 and 3:00 for any of the
studies included in the kind of group that we've just gathered up.
So that kind of, you know, starting point tells you that, you know, maybe frequency doesn't matter,
which is actually the view of a big chunk of the hypertrophy research community who basically say
that if you apportion your volume across the week in any way you like, you'll get the same result as
long as you're doing the same number of search to failure.
And there are people who still say that.
There are people who still say that physiologically it's impossible are the two reasons that we
start with when we explained the beginnings of this conversation like you can't have a volume dose
response that's nonlinear and you can't have maintenance studies showing net hypertrophy and sorry
that hypertrophy is 0 because you have hypertrophy and latrophy equally.
You can't have those two observations existing and also say that as long as volume is equated,
frequency doesn't matter.
So clearly there's a problem here.
And the likelihood is that we're just not capable of detecting the significance with the current
power, you know, powers that we're using in the current study designs that we're using.
So frequency probably does matter, it's just that we're not seeing it.
And that brings us to the third category, which is that if you look at one compare 1:00 and 3:00,
every single study shows you either a significant benefit of three versus one or a non significant
benefit of three versus 1.
So out of the three studies, the two of them were significantly better with three times versus one
time and the third was non significantly better.
So that is really, really interesting because what it tells you is that if you've got one and three
being different from each other, that tells you that the fact that two and one weren't different
from each other and that two and three weren't different from each other.
This is just a statistics issue.
This is just a significance problem is the fact that because we get this with some volume studies,
like I say to people, if you look at a lot of volume studies, what you'll find is that they may be
compared one set, 2 sets and three sets, or one set, 2 set, three sets and five sets or something
like that.
And you get the same issue.
You get something like one set and three sets are different, but two sets not different from three
sets and two sets are not different from one set.
It's like, how can that be?
And it's just the way stats works.
If you don't have a big enough difference, it won't pick it up.
And that's what we're probably seeing with frequency.
You've got one and three are clearly different, but 2 isn't different from either one or three.
Well, that's just telling.
You've got a, you've got a, you've got a sliding scale, isn't it?
It's just telling you that 2 is worse than three probably, and 2 is better than one probably.
And the only real difference is you're picking up because of the statistical capacities are one and
three being different?
But this then comes like, what is your process for making decisions about how strength training
works?
You know, because, and this is the point I've been arguing, like if people are taking this kind of
maximus point of view where they go, I only look at long term training studies.
Now, interestingly, this is like an evidence based idea where you can only use long term training
studies as evidence.
And there's parts of that community who think that.
And it's like, well, if you're going to do that, then the only thing you can possibly say is that
three sets is better than one set.
You can't say anything about two sets at all.
Really.
The only thing you can say is that 3 is better than one.
And so really, if you've got like a logical brain, you go, well, I'll just do three times a week
then, because I can't say anything about two people like, oh, well, no, no, you can because you can
say that 2 is not as you can say that 2 is the same as three.
No, no, not really, because you can also say that one is the same as two.
And that really cancels out the benefits of saying that 2 is the same as 3.
So you kind of, you kind of can clearly see that 3 is better than two really.
So I think if you like have got this set of data and you look at it, you can say that long term
training studies are not inconsistent with the physiological model that we started with, which is
that a higher frequency 3 is going to be better than two, which is going to be better than one.
That's not inconsistent with what these frequency trials are saying.
Now, do the frequency trials, long term training studies support the physiological model, You know,
unequivocally.
No, they don't.
They're they're messy, they're vague, they're in their Gray zone, but they don't contradict it.
And that's the argument that I'm kind of being hit with at the moment, which is that people say long
term training studies contradict what you're saying.
Now, why do they say that?
They say that because the Courier meta analysis, which was done on 119 studies had a effect size for
all of their studies that showed that hypertrophy at 2 times was better than hypertrophy at three
times.
But that's not what we're doing here because we're not looking at those studies, those 119, we're
looking at only frequency studies.
So a couple of questions, people or critiques or criticisms, whatever pushback that people might
have.
So one is you've, you briefly mentioned the difference between direct and indirect measurements.
Can you unpack that a little bit more?
Yeah.
So a direct measurement of hypertrophy is one that measures one specific muscle using a scanning or
an imaging technique.
So if you're using ultrasound, which is very common, the cheapest and easiest and most accessible
form of measuring hypertrophy, that's totally fine.
If you've got access to MRI or CT or whatever like that, you can use that.
Now if you're using something like DEXA to measure lean body mass, then that's an indirect
measurement.
And generally speaking, hypertrophy research is kind of just drop indirect measurement studies when
they're doing large scale meta meta analytical review type things because indirect is messy, it's
vague, it's imprecise, it's really not helpful.
Again, it's much more of a public health type measurement than what we're interested in, which is is
this particular muscle growing.
So I just excluded the indirect stuff.
Now, if somebody wants to do another analysis and show what happens when you put the indirect in, I
don't think it will change anything particularly.
But I'm just not interested in that data source.
I don't think it tells you.
Anything.
And then another point you made is you differentiate between what was statistically significant and
what was insignificant statistically, but was trending towards that way.
And then obviously we've got another earlier meta analysis on frequency, the Schoenfeld 1, and a
critique people would make is 3 times per week was trending towards beta, but it wasn't
statistically significant.
For people who are unaware of that language, can you unpack that?
Yeah.
So essentially what's what statistical tests are trying to do in, in layman's terms.
So if any stats savvy people are listening to this and they don't like my vernacular, they can they
can have an have a go themselves explaining it to lay people.
I'm more than more than willing to listen to that.
But basically what what statistical test is trying to do is not is not tell you how big an effect is
really.
It's not trying to tell you that something is massively different in size from something else.
It's trying to tell you that the difference that you're observing is not being caused by randomness.
It's not being caused by chance.
So you're trying to establish a probability, a good probability, that what you're looking at is a
genuine, the difference caused by a genuine effect rather than just by life being random at you.
So essentially historically in sports science, we've followed a very kind of not rigorous is the
wrong word, very rigid almost model of using stats in a certain way.
The Bayesian stuff that we talked about today, the network analysis is totally different from that.
It's new.
People are starting to use Bayesian for probabilities.
I don't like the Bayesian stuff because I don't agree with most of the research priors that are
used.
So Bayesian analysis kind of requires you to stop from having a prior.
And my priors are completely different from everybody else's unless they follow me.
And so we would pretty much start with different starting points.
But the statistical analysis that most people use Excise Science and all of these studies that we've
listed out or I've listed out on my on my table that we've talked about today, all of those use the
same statistical analysis methods.
And essentially they're just looking for what we call P values.
So people are kind of are going, you know, does my P value get to less than .05 or .01 or whatever
threshold they assign significance.
And then basically, you know, as I say in layman's terms, getting below that threshold means that
your effect is not random or judged to be not random.
That's what it is.
So essentially, if you have a numerical, the difference which is large, but it doesn't, doesn't what
we say reach this threshold for statistical significance, then what we're saying is that even though
the number is large, it could actually be due to chance.
If the number is really large, then you've got to look at it and you go, well, does that mean your
study was underpowered to be able to detect that difference?
And that's a possibility.
And you can kind of do a bit of fiddling around and see from the numbers that the study provides you
with whether you think that's the case.
But the reason that I mention the numerical difference in this third study is because it's the third
of three of which the other two showed that effect.
So if you think about it, if you've got three studies and two of them show statistically significant
benefits of three times and your third has a number trending in the same direction or the
numerically is the same, then that you've kind of got a bit more comfort because you've seen two
studies that have reached significance.
Your third one is trending in the same direction.
You're like, well, let's mention that because I've already got the comfort of the other two
pointing, you know, in the same direction.
If the numerical difference had been the other way around, I wouldn't have said anything.
Now people go, oh, I'm going to jump all over that now because Chris is saying that he's biased.
No, I'm saying that I'm using Bayesian reasoning because I've actually started and noticed that my
priors are being created by the two significant results and therefore my third.
I'm expecting it to go in the same direction.
When it does.
I'm then happy about that.
Fine, great.
You know, so it's kind of like the only reason I've mentioned that number, it is because of the
other two pointing in the same direction.
So it gives us kind of a A3 for three really.
And interestingly, in that third study, which had a numerical difference, the strength differences
were huge and much better for three than for one.
So not only did it have, and I actually got a bunch of other studies that show that 3 is better than
one for strength, but that's by the by.
So you've kind of got this situation where we can see the strength is supporting the hypertrophy
numbers.
Of course, you know, perhaps this is a subject for another time, but we can talk about why strength
gains are a really good reflection of hypertroid in most cases.
Just came out another study showing that.
Really nice paper done in the UK actually showing that strength and hypertrophy are very closely
correlated over time.
Strength gains, sorry, and hypertrophy relatively closely correlated over time.
So the fact that strength gains were also better in three than one in that particular study, I think
gives me comfort in the numbers probably being meaningful, just not statistically significant.
And again, I'm trying to explain this in layman's terms.
My vernacular for statistical analysis probably is not correct.
But yeah, you can yell at me on social media if you want to do that.
So let me just rewind very, very briefly.
One of the rules, not rules, one of the guidelines of metro analysis is that if your metro analysis
gives you an answer that is not supported by any single study in your metro analysis, then stop.
So if you're doing a metro analysis of some particular thing and you've got the answer and the metro
analysis tells you that the answer is clearly that X is better than I, but every single study you've
got doesn't show that X is better than Y, then you need to stop and you need to figure out why that
is.
So some people have and that's, that's kind of like a just a generally accepted principle of, of
doing, of sense checking your metro analysis.
If you do a metro analysis and you look at your underlying data and none of your data shows that 2
is better than one and your meta says that 2 is better than one, you need to stop and you need to go
and try and figure out why your meta is giving you nonsense answers now.
So essentially, you can literally just eyeball your studies and go, what are the studies telling me?
And if you've got like, we've got pretty much a clear pattern of three being better than one and
nothing else happening, then your meta should tell you that 3 is better than one and nothing really
else is happening.
That's what it should tell you more or less.
And if that's not what it's telling you, then you've got a problem with your meta in answering that
particular question.
Now, again, I'm repeating myself, but I don't think the Courier was really trying to do that.
I think that the fitness influencers who are using the Courier to and I really hope that nobody in
the Courier paper team get this podcast and they think I'm insulting them or upset, you know, being
rude about what they've done.
I think that fitness influencers are using that paper incorrectly.
They are jumping on a numerical value that has been calculated and they're comparing 2 numerical
values, one for 3 * 1 for two times and they are claiming that I have meaningful and I don't think
it is.
I think that the way the analysis was done doesn't allow you to draw that conclusion because they're
including studies that are not really comparable, or at least the frequency elements of them are
not.
So where does that lead us?
So someone's asking a question of, well, is one time or two times or three times every other day,
What's best?
What should I do if I want to maximize growth?
How can one actually look at that question and answer that with any confidence?
Because ultimately it sounds like we don't have enough actual outcome data there to rely on.
Exactly, which is why we don't just use outcome data, we use a combination of Physiology, outcome
data and actually we can look back at bodybuilders of pre 1950s and see that they train the same way
as the Physiology would predict.
And broadly speaking, the outcome day to predict the long term training studies.
What we've got is a long term training data set of studies which tells us that 3 is better than one.
And we can infer that maybe that means that two sits somewhere in the middle between 1:00 and 3:00.
That will be logical.
The Physiology tells us that 3 is better than two, which is better than one.
So that gives the same pattern.
And the bodybuilders of pre 1950 train three times a week.
Most of the time.
We've got a full house here.
You know, I mean, nowhere in this group of points is anybody pointing at 2 saying, well look, 2 is
clearly better than three.
Well, where?
Nowhere that's.
Nowhere.
That's an interesting point, yeah.
00 places.
There are zero places where 2 comes up at the top of the list.
It doesn't come up in Physiology.
It doesn't come up in the bodybuilders pre 1915.
It doesn't come up in the outcome long term training data.
Yes, there is a effect size in a metro analysis of a bunch of studies that didn't compare training
frequency that has a higher value for two than three.
Honestly, stop sending me that chart.
If this podcast achieves anything, please stop sending me the chart of that effect size comparison,
because it's not answering the question you think is answering because it's not using data that's
designed to answer that question.
Yeah, it's, I mean, that's a really important point is that often studies get thrown around online
and there might be an image or chart or graph or a table or whatever.
And that becomes very shareable that people don't realize what it is that that is actually based on,
or what the question was that that analysis was answering or what the studies that were included
were looking at.
And it's very easy for something to suddenly become circulated and become gospel when in fact it's
it was never intended to even answer the question we think is being asked.
Exactly that that chart that includes data from studies that didn't compare training frequency.
People are running around with the idea that because there's a big number of studies incorporated in
that chart, it's like 119 studies.
Wow.
You know, imagine all that data.
It's not allowing you to get at the variance that is ascribed to training frequency.
There's too much variance ascribed to other variables like which subjects trained or untrained
elderly, there's a whole ton of elderly people studies in that meta analysis, you know, so I was
explaining to you before we jumped on this call.
I, I actually typed every single study out into an Excel spreadsheet because I wanted to see it for
myself to understand the data perfectly.
I, I actually physically wrote every single study name out on a spreadsheet and I wrote down whether
it was a Hypertroy study, whether it was a strength study, whether they compared frequency or
whether they didn't.
So I actually did my own legwork and went through every single item on the list and that's how I
know they missed the Schoenfeldt out.
Now maybe I just had a blackout moment and missed it off the list, in which case I apologize
profusely to them for saying that they missed out.
And maybe it missed their exclusion criteria.
Maybe it didn't fit their inclusion criteria.
So maybe not an error, but you know, that's, that's just kind of the process that I went through and
making sure that I'd done the necessary work to understand all of the frequency data that was being
used to calculate that answer or that job.
I remember when this study was becoming popular, obviously it's two years old, but it kind of came
to surface larger than social media six months ago.
And another claim that is being drawn out of that study, out of that analysis was that single sets
were useless.
And I remember going in and looking at the studies all looking at the the single sets, first multi
sets and going into each specific one and, and realizing this, if we look at direct comparisons,
they'll have the.
Exact same problem.
The exact same problem will exist.
So what you'll have is you'll have a bunch of studies that use single sets, a bunch of studies that
use multiple sets, and you'll have exactly the same problem.
Now they might say, Oh, well, I don't want to make comments about their team because I don't think
they're answering questions that we're interested in.
I don't.
So I don't want to assume that their purpose in the way that they've gone about their analysis is
the same as our purposes because I don't think it is.
And therefore it's inappropriate for me to criticize their analysis because it's done for different
purposes.
I'm not criticizing what they're doing or have done.
This is not a criticism.
I'm saying that for our purposes it doesn't help us with that comparison because if we want to be
very specific about answering the question of multi sets versus single sets, we would want to
actually separate out the studies that have compared those directly and then do a meta analysis of
those studies.
And that's the way that you would exclude variance that is not attributable to your question of
interest, which is either frequency or or volume in this case.
So for our listeners, they've listened to this, they've listened to what you've had to say about
this analysis, and then suddenly 10 minutes later, they're going to see a post online and someone's
going to say, oh, there's no outcome data that shows that three times a week is better.
And here's a new study that shows that twice a week is better or as good or whatever.
What's your advice to how do you make sense of this space?
How do you make sense when suddenly there's another loud voice, he's yelling the opposite and saying
no, no, there's no outcome dial that shows this what someone meant to do.
So the only thing you can do is go and look at the source of the information they're quoting, which
in this case was the, in many cases regarding this conversation, was the Courier metro analysis.
So you'd have to go back to that Metro analysis, you'd have to pull up the paper, which is not
difficult to do, and you'd have to then look at it and see whether or not what they were saying
about the paper was in fact correct.
Now, if your expertise doesn't extend to doing that, then you're in trouble really.
And honestly, what are you even doing listening to people giving that information if you haven't got
the ability to interrogate it?
Yeah, yeah, that is you.
Know, and this is this is an issue that I face all the time when people come to me and say, you
know, they, they send me videos or they send me clips and they say, I mean, we've just had a week in
which we talked about neuromechanical matching.
Last week on the podcast, we answered a whole bunch of criticisms and as a result of that podcast, a
whole bunch of talking heads started to pump content out about neural mechanical matching and most
of it was negative.
And people sent me a lot of that stuff and they said this person is saying this and this person is
saying that and how do I understand it?
I'm like, what?
If you think those are criticisms then you haven't understood the podcast that we did on neural
mechanical matching because almost every single one of those criticisms involved arguing against a
non existent imaginary form of non neuro mechanical matching that is not what is described in the
literature.
You know neuro mechanical matching is about maximizing efficiency.
It tries to maximize the torque output for the minimum amount of energy input.
It's not trying to find prime movers, it's not trying to maximize joint torque.
It's literally just trying to maximize efficiency.
In the only way you can do that is by sending as much activation as you can towards muscles that
have better leverage.
That's it, very simple.
But we've got a whole load of talking heads who are trying to argue against something that doesn't
exist and people are believing it because they haven't done the work to understand what it is in the
1st place is actually being argued about.
But this is human nature.
People just want to be entertained.
And if that's what your purpose is for going on social media in the fitness industry, you just want
to be entertained, then yeah, you are being entertained.
You're not being educated because you're not, because you're not.
And people go, no, no, no, no.
I want to see both sides of the argument.
I'm like stating that there are two sides of an argument completely ignores the fact that each group
of people that you're referring to are not talking about the same thing.
You know, you can't.
You know, if one group of people is saying, look, this is how neurochemical matching works and we
think that it is the best explanation for how the brain allocates central motor command and
exercise.
And the other group of people are saying, here is what we think neurochemical matching is, which is
completely different from what you know, the other group was saying.
And we think that it's wrong because this imaginary version that we've created doesn't do what we
want it to do.
I'm like, well if you think there's a two sides of a of an argument, you're delusional.
Yeah, it doesn't help me get to the truth, does it?
Because it's ultimately it's a straw man argument.
There's not even two sides of the argument.
People say I want to see both sides of the argument.
Well, those two things are not two sides of the same argument.
One group is presenting an artificial like picture of something that's non existent and the other
group are trying to explain to you how something works from literature.
If like the other group who is criticizing are capable of explaining how the principle is supposed
to work and then pointing out errors in it, fine.
That's two sides of an argument.
But I mentioned this on my Instagram story.
People say how do you deal with all these people?
How do you deal with all these detractors?
And I'm like, well, it's not a detractor until they can state my position correctly.
They're arguing against a fictitious version of me that doesn't exist with opinions that don't
exist.
They've made it all up in their own mind because they haven't done the reading to understand what
the actual thing was.
Now people go, Oh no, no, no, no, you're just, you're just arguing.
You know, this is a rhetorical device.
You're spitting hairs.
It's semantics.
No, it's not semantics.
It's literally 1 model is defined as efficiency maximization.
The other model is designed defined as talk maximization.
They're totally different models.
You know, what they're calling neuron is not neurochemical matching.
It's something they're made-up as a straw man, maybe inadvertently, because they think that it
should work like that.
And it that's not the way it works.
I think we get this problem all the time.
And obviously I don't really have any actionable advice for people to solve that problem because you
don't.
I'm the last person in the world that would be able to help you with that.
What you need, if you want to actually find somebody who can give you advice of how to navigate that
terrain, you would ask somebody who doesn't already know everything about that subject.
I know more about this subject than anybody else on the planet.
I mean, that's just a fact of me spending the last kind of 10 to 15 years reading all day.
You know I know this.
Literature about the people who do this for a living.
But I'm, I'm, I'm doing this out of a obsession, not that of a living.
And I think that I'm therefore and I'm not saying that therefore, oh, therefore everyone should
listen to me and ignore everyone else.
No, I'm saying that I'm not that or the right person to ask.
Ultimately Agate in the sense you failed at that, didn't you?
Because you, you saw, you went down this path of having to figure it all out yourself because you
weren't satisfied.
Because I wasn't satisfied with the answers I was being given, correct?
So I don't know how to solve that problem.
And I'm the last person in the world that would be able to answer that for you.
Because as you point out, I failed at being able to find a reliable source.
So I went and established the answers myself.
All I can really say that I think is even remotely helpful is find the source that the person is
quoting and get that source in your hand.
That's all I can say that I think is even remotely useful.
You know, if people because that would have fixed the problem in this particular case, it would fix
the problem in the case of new mechanical matching.
If somebody's confused about the frequency debate and they're confused, why do why does the Courier
metro analysis say this?
Why do you say that?
Get the Courier analysis in your hand and read it.
And if you fully understand it, then you'll come to the conclusion that I've come to when I solve
the mechanical matching question.
Go and download the publicly available review paper on here.
We're going to matching see what the people who have come up with the hypothesis and built the model
have said about it.
And you'll understand this about efficiency.
It's about maximizing talk for the amount of energy input.
And so you'll straight away see that that's the answer.
So all I would say is if you're trying to navigate this terrain, you have to go back to the source.
Now, the nice thing about the way that I've presented all my material is that you can just do that
because you can go to the FAQ, you can find the thing you want to look at, and in the FAQ, every
single citation will be there.
So you can look at the citation, you can go and put it into Google Scholar and you can pull up the
paper that you're interested in learning about.
So I've done it in a way that satisfies that requirement.
A lot of other people will just talk about study and not tell you what it is.
And so you won't, you'll have to ask them.
I'm sure they'll tell you, but you might have to ask them.
That's the only.
Thing I know I do this sometimes on when I post online, sometimes I don't include the citation and I
do that on purpose.
And what I do is I'll include keywords that are very obviously used as part of that study.
I'll include say participant number, maybe the year of the study, some things like that.
Because if someone says to me, how do I find the study and I've included very obvious details, that
tells me you don't actually have the skill set to understand that study.
This is a really interesting conversation.
I don't want to have this now, but I often do stuff that that is kind of similar in the sense that I
will exclude information that I think people aren't qualified to assess.
So I include a citation.
So if somebody wants to pull up the paper, they can go and pull up the paper and they'll have every
single piece of information that's available to them.
And if they've passed that threshold of searching for the paper and pulling it out, which is a very
low threshold to be honest, then they can then and they can do some assessments.
The thing that I never include in any of my infographics is the number of participants in a study.
Never, ever, not once.
The reason I don't do that is because people who think they know something about research analysis
will tell me that they think a study is underpowered or overpowered.
Not overpowered ever.
It's always a study that they don't like is always underpowered, and they just look at the number of
subjects.
Now go, how have you deduced this underpowered?
I think it should be 20 and it's only 18 or whatever.
Now, how did you know?
And they don't, they don't have, they don't have the first idea of what power analysis looks like.
And so I never do that.
If you've got the ability to pull up the paper, then OK, you can make your own mistakes and you can
decide whether you think a study is under powered or not.
And you're probably wrong.
You know, you at least demonstrated the capacity to pull up paper on your own.
What I'm not going to do is give people the ability to do that based on my infographic, because I
will spend my entire day commenting saying, have you done a reverse power analysis to establish what
you just said is correct?
And then we're going, what are you talking about?
I'm just looking at the number of subjects I'm going, I can see what you're doing and there's
garbage, you know, So I do similar things in the sense that I I don't allow information that I think
people are going to misuse, but with the citation, if they wish to, they can go and get access to
it, whatever.
So I think we're taking, we're doing the very similar thing in the sense that we're trying to screen
people a little bit so that they don't, you know, find information that's just going to distract
them from something educational.
I mean, at the end of the day, this comes back to are we trying to educate to it?
Are we trying to make money by building an audience?
You know, and I think that's unfortunately a route, a question that a lot of fitness influences
probably can't answer very honestly.
I'm inadvertently educating because I'm just talking about stuff that I find interesting.
And I make infographics because it's the best way of taking notes that I've found.
When I come back and look at a study, I want to know why I thought about it when I read it.
And the infographic gives me that answer.
So really what you're doing when you see my infographics is you're seeing what my note taking looks
like.
And everything else is just me organizing my thoughts on, on subjects.
If that's helpful to people, fantastic.
But I'm not trying to, you know, really do anything more than find out how these things work.
Fortunately, there wasn't a simple answer there.
You know, ultimately what you're saying is is go back to the source.
And I think that's good.
But unfortunately, going back to that source is likely to take one a day, half a day just to go
through that source material depending on what it is and hopefully.
Well, it took me about 5 minutes with the Courier to realise that what we're dealing with was
something completely irrelevant to the question.
So I think if you.
Yeah, this is true.
There might be some, yeah.
A research paper, you might be able to disallow certain situations within 5 minutes.
You can probably see some Spanish, the slide, yeah.
I really didn't expect this, this career Metallasis to be quite such a shoo in.
I thought I'd be traipsing through studies trying to figure out what was going on for like a day and
a half.
And I knew within 5 minutes of picking up the paper that it was irrelevant.
So it was then.
It was just an interesting process, really.
So I think it really depends.
But yeah, what we've got, I think really is a whole bunch of people who they find themselves
attached to a particular person or tribal identity, and then they just kind of go along with
whatever's being said.
And if somebody publishes a little chart that says with no citation written on it, with no
information about how the data was gathered, you know, and they like, say, oh, 119 studies.
And it gave this result and everyone's running around with their hands in the air.
It's like, well, OK, well, how how did you get 119 frequency studies?
Is that even possible?
I mean, that should have been your.
Oh, yeah.
OK.
So if you want like to take a step before the step of getting the source material, you know, if
somebody posts a chart that says this chart includes 119 studies and it's a chart telling you about
training frequency, hopefully that would set alarm bells ringing because you should know that there
are not 119 frequency studies available.
I mean, I hope you know that maybe you don't.
But yeah, so like, ultimately there should be some alarm bells ringing just in terms of like, does
this even pass the sniff test?
And then the second thing would then be get the source material.
I mean, hopefully educators would know that the problem is people who just want to know what they
should be doing.
And I know I say hopefully because most point, but people, these people just want to know what they
should be doing in the gym, you know?
They don't.
They shouldn't be following me then.
I mean honestly, come on.
I mean, like they can follow you.
I mean, that's, that's what your, your, your account is, is designed to do.
It's designed to help people understand exactly how they can either obtain a program that will give
them best results, whatever, or they can even write their own based on the education that you
provide.
And they have the confidence that it is based on pre 1950 bodybuilders who were doing things pretty
much without the aid of any extraneous, you know, pharmaceuticals.
And so it was pretty much the best anecdotal data that exists and has ever existed, you know, So,
you know, I think that's what your account is brilliant at.
But if somebody's coming to my account and complaining that I'm not giving them a, you know,
education in how to write a program, then sorry, I'm not intending to do that.
You know, I'm for the tiny fraction of percentage of people on the industry who want to want to
understand how this works, not just what works, but how it works, because that's my obsession is
figuring out how it works.
You know, one of my the few things that irritates me is when somebody comes to my account and tells
me what they think I should do to help them.
It's like, no, I'm sharing what I think is interesting.
If it doesn't help you, go and follow somebody else.
Yeah, can you do content like this?
No I can't.
I'm doing content because I find it interesting. 160,000 people also find it interesting, which is
fantastic.
But I'm not going to change what I do to appeal to noise because I'm not really that commercial.
I'm just doing stuff that interests me.
I mean, hopefully people should realize that by now.
If I was trying to do stuff that attracted attention, I would not do random technical infographics
on the stretch shortening cycle, you know, I would not do stuff on, you know, kind of like how does,
I don't know, I'm trying to think of something random that I've done recently that was completely
irrelevant to 99.9% of the planet.
You know, most there's infographics I post that people are looking at going.
Why would you post that?
Because I find it interesting, because it helps me understand how this Physiology works.
So I did the study and I did notes on it.
I have one more question for you before we wrap up.
And I know again, this is we've gone down a bit of a tangent here, but it is somewhat relevant.
So if we don't have as much sort of, you know, outcome data perhaps as people might, you know, lead
others to believe that we do, one option we have is to look at things like physiological models.
And so you've developed a weakly net stimulus model, and I'm sure we'll talk about that in more
detail perhaps in in future episodes.
But in a nutshell, what is like, what is a model?
What is a model?
Why does a physiological model actually help us answer these questions that we're lacking enough
outcome data on?
So basically a physiological model is a very useful tool for two reasons.
Firstly, it starts by establishing some really strong physiological observations which we're
confident.
So we're very confident for example, in the two physiological observations that we started with
today, which is that there is hypertrophy is always either muscle fibers are always either growing
or shrinking.
And therefore we've got the possibility of net hypertrophy over the week being 0 because you have
hypertrophy followed by atrophy.
Secondly, we're very confident that the stimulus you can create in a strengthening workout is
nonlinear, that you don't like stack sets on to again, physiological reasons for that.
If you then build a model on the basis of those really strong observation, you can tinker with some
of the numbers, but ultimately the shape of the model is always coming probably the same.
Now, if you've got a whole lot of outcome data that don't fit that or they're very what I would call
grey data in the sense that they just don't tell you anything, then your model can add to your
outcome data, your long term training data and give you like a steer on what you think is happening.
Now.
That's exactly what we've seen today, which is that the physiological model tells you that 3 is
better than two and 2 is better than one.
Definitively the very grey, messy kind of outcome day to tell you that 3 is better than one, but
two, we're not really sure about South.
Straight away you just put the two together and you know, OK, I can see what's going on, no worries.
So it allows you that extra kind of steer on your training studies data to be able to put the two
together and form a very clear picture of what's going on.
Secondly, if you have a model, especially one that has had a calculator built on it or you can run
in Excel, you can fill in the gaps that you don't have.
So somebody says to me, what happens if I train every other day?
And the outcome data maximalists will say, oh, well, we don't know.
It could be anything, you know, to be anything.
You could be teleported to Mars.
I mean, we just don't know and yet the model will tell you exactly what happens.
So it fills in the gaps, it fills in the gaps in the data that you don't have.
Essentially, it's good for those two reasons.
It allows you a bit more confidence on your training study data and fills, flushes the picture out.
And secondly, it allows you to answer questions that you just can't answer from the long term
training data.
And of course, practically from a personal point of view, it allows you to literally put your
training program into the calculator and, and tell you whether you could manipulate it in One
Direction or another and get a better result.
So from a practical point of view, it's actually very interesting as well.
Actually is usable in a kind of programming sense, but you know, not giving the game away too much,
but it will pretty much tell you just to train like a pre 1950s bodybuilder.
I mean, that's always good to tell you.
I, I kind of like take great comfort in the fact that, you know, yes, the outcome data is a little
bit grey.
It doesn't tell you everything you want to know.
The model sits really well with the outcome data, but tells you a lot more.
And the bodybuilding community pre 1950 basically tells you to train how the model tells you to
train.
So for me, I don't see how anybody can argue with this with a straight face.
I think that anybody who wants to argue with this has got to say why does the outcome long term
training data not show that 2 is better than three?
If you think 2 is better than three, it doesn't show that.
Why do pre 1950 bodybuilders not train with two times a week or upper lower space?
They just didn't.
And why does the model not give you 2 * a week, but then three, doesn't it?
So, you know, there is no part of this matrix that supports 2 * a week.
It just doesn't exist.
Everything supports 3 now.
Some support 3 better than others, but they all kind of lean in that direction, some strongly, some
weakly.
And I think ultimately it's just being pushed, the idea that 2 is somehow the same as three or
better than three.
It's just been pushed by people who like to train like that.
You know, that's all it is.
People decide they like training like that.
And therefore, because their ego and requires their preferences to be perfect, they can't really,
you know, kind of get themselves out of the mindset that their preference might not be perfect.
Yeah, yeah.
I mean, it's, you can't overlook, I guess in human psychology and all of this and in these topics
and questions that come up on social media.
Obviously full body, at least in the world that I was part of, full body was not the norm.
That was OK for beginners, but that was it.
No bodybuilder would do that.
No advanced lifter would do that.
And so the status quo was either grow split or upper, lower.
And anytime we challenge our status quo, these people who stand to lose something from that and
there's going to be, you know, emotional attachment to that and kick back to that, of course.
And I guess ultimately, that's kind of what we're saying.
And it'll be interesting to see.
We're definitely over the next couple of weeks, I'm sure there'll be a lot of emotional, I guess,
responses to what we're saying.
But, you know, the question is ultimately like, why are you doing what you're doing?
You know, if someone has a good justification why they want to stick to upper lower, by all means,
let's hear it.
Well, nobody has to justify to me how they trade.
They trade however they like.
I mean, I literally I've got no judgment on anything whatsoever.
The only thing that I'm interested in is, you know, what physiologically is, is happening.
And in the absence of any human factors, what would be the best training program?
You know, leaving aside whether somebody likes it or dislikes it, what would be the best training
program?
I think that's a massive red herring when people say, you know, you can't argue that 2 is better
than three or three is better than two because somebody might like 2 and somebody might like 3.
And I'm like, no, that's just simply not the question.
It's literally a relevant question.
We want to answer this question first, physiologically, what is the best possible outcome?
And then separately after that you can make a decision about what you want to do.
Exactly.
It's a coaching question.
It's absolutely a coaching question, you know?
OK, we went down some pathways that didn't expect us to go down, but hopefully there's there's
something there for people who have followed us this have fun.
We go and a half.
Hopefully you guys have have kept up.
I think this is really interesting topic.
I do think that this is one that, you know, obviously it's.
Frequency and.
Jelly or yeah, yeah, I mean, you know, full body, upper, lower splits.
So you can see all of this stuff.
It has a huge amount of application.
It it's really interesting physiologically.
It's where all of this sort of converges.
So I'm sure we'll do future podcasts on some variance of this topic, but you know, as always, we're
interested in in what you guys are interested in as well.
So if you've got questions, feedback, ideas based off this, or just on other topics as well, please
let us know.
Send them to me because Jake doesn't read his direct messages.
You can put put them in my Q&A, that's fine as well.
I see that I just get overwhelmed with DMS.
There's too many, so put in my questions.
I'm amazed that you check your DMS.
That feels like inverted to to what I'd expect, but sure.
OK.
Anyway, thank you guys for joining us and we do hope you'll join us again next week.