Episode: 025 How does insufficient sleep affect training?
URL: https://open.spotify.com/episode/0gFPhaBHFsZws2l2Hnfb4d
Published: 2025-11-09
================================================================================

Hello invisible others forever and wherever you are.
Welcome back to episode.
Actually, this is our 25th episode.
So I guess it's like a a milestone or something.
So thank you guys for being with us so far.
I'm joined with my Co host Chris Beasley.
How are you this week?
Yeah, I'm doing well.
Thanks, Jake.
Feel like I've been podcasting back-to-back this weekend.
Yeah, it's.
Professional podcaster.
That's your new title.
Talking with Rob yesterday when we did episode on proximal to digital sequencing that can be out on
Wednesday.
So hopefully you guys will watch that as well.
Listen to that as well.
It's starting to get into interesting topics now.
It's moving away from the basics of strength and speed and stuff like that and talking about some
pretty cool stuff.
So looking forward to feedback on that one.
And you last week you said you had an event coming up that you were going to tell us more about
today.
I didn't, I completely forgot.
Yes.
So a there's a post in my Instagram feed about it couple of days back.
I will keep posting in my Instagram stories so people can find it there relatively easily.
Doing a seminar on preserving muscle mass while dieting at it's the time of day is designed to be
fairly early in the morning in the USI think the earliest time in the USI think is 8:00 AM on the on
the West Coast.
But hopefully that'll be OK for most people.
For me, it's lasting at night, it's in my evening.
So again, it kind of captures hopefully a decent number of time zones.
The only time zone it doesn't work for is you, and it doesn't work for.
Us in the middle of the night.
Yeah, it's.
The middle of the night, so hopefully we won't see anybody from Australia that you know, obviously
they can, they can catch the recording later on.
So there will be like a recording download, something that people do get access to that.
I would encourage people to sign up.
I don't know how we will organise the, the availability of the recording afterwards.
I'm not doing the technology part on that.
So, but yes, I would just encourage people if they are interested to, to please sign up and we will
do, you know, probably something else, you know, later on, maybe early next year and, and talk more
about the topic because there's a lot to say.
And so I just want to leave it with, with this observation, which is that we are going to be talking
about stuff that I've never seen anyone else talk about.
I think there is stuff in there that is interesting and new.
Maybe I'm, I mean maybe there is somebody who's mentioned it once, twice, but I don't see it
commonly discussed.
So there's going to be some new ish Physiology, not new in the sense that it's new Physiology in the
sense that it is relatively UN discussed or unknown, not unknown, but relatively poorly covered in
the fitness industry on the topic of preserving muscle mass while dieting.
So hopefully people will tap into to to sort of learn about that if they if they can.
Sounds very exciting and even for Aussies, yes, I think 4:00 AM or whatever time it is, is early.
But you know, I was thinking about this before.
I'm not going to let you turn up and sit in on this if I see your name pop up.
Kick me out.
Well, I guess here's the thing, right?
Like when I started in this industry, like, you know, I would drive half a day.
I would go into state to go to a single day workshop.
Yeah.
Like that was in norm.
People would fly across the world.
Can you get outside of your state in half a day of driving?
I don't think you can.
8 hours depends what your class is.
Half, half like a, you know, a full day.
That was pretty much a full day.
But you know, people would do that and ultimately what you're saying you, you've got this event
where people don't even need to leave their bed.
They don't even need to pay for it.
You just have to get up early.
So I, I don't know if I will be there at 4:00 AM or whatever time, but I can understand if someone
does choose to do that.
And I think that that's all power to your go for gold anyway.
So to celebrate your new Physiology high performance, high performance Physiology podcast, I am
going to discuss a silver athletic program today.
So yes, you almost fell off your chair there.
Now this is a Bob Hoffman plan.
So we've obviously talked a lot about well, several times about Bob Hoffman in the past.
I found of York Barbell.
Well, kind of when York when became York Barbell.
So that was Bob Hoffman's doing.
And then, you know, behind Strength and Health magazine and obviously super influential in the
silver era, a coach of the the US weightlifting team coached a lot of the early Mr. Americas, you
know, people like John Grimek.
So you know, incredibly influential character.
And obviously part of what Bob Hoffman, his focus point was not just bodybuilding, but this
intersection of bodybuilding with weightlifting and with other athletic pursuits.
So he was one of the, I'm sure not the only person, but one of the earlier people to talk about
weightlifting and, and more specifically, I guess, bodybuilding for athletes.
So that's what this plan is.
And in fact, he actually talks about plans for all kinds of athletes.
And we may cover some of these in the future as well.
He talks about, you know, even like I think golfers and and I think he talked about fencing and
talks about, you know, football and soccer.
And I don't know if it's both football and soccer, one of the other, I assume, but there's dozens of
different sports that he talks about training athletes for and how they can engage in, in
bodybuilding activities.
So pretty interesting stuff.
And today we have the standard like the very base plan that he would use just with generic athletes.
This was his his basic athletic program just to begin introducing an athlete to hypertrophy.
So not over any specific goal.
I guess the goal here would actually just be hypertrophy for that athlete and then they could kind
of siphon off to their particular sport.
So this was a full body plan as was, you know, fairly normal for Bob Hoffman and for most people at
this time.
And again, similar to a lot of York's plans, this was single sets.
Obviously York did do, did utilize and Hoffman did utilize multi sets at different points.
And again, sets were not necessarily the most important aspect of a plan.
And they often talked about, well, you can do 2 sets, you can do one set, you can do additional
exercises, you can do the you know, there was a lot of variability and flexibility within that.
But here he did specify one set and 6 to 12 repetitions and doing that sort of, you know, standard
double progression method where you increase repetitions up to 12 and then you jump back down to
six.
So barbell focused and we begin with a barbell curl.
We then move into a barbell military press, an overhead press and then a stiff leg deadlift.
We then have kind of like a combo exercise.
So a barbell pull over that kind of moves into a bench.
So yeah, I guess a bit of a complex there.
Then into a barbell side to side bend.
So this is where you place a barbell on your back like a squat and literally just bend side to side
with the barbell on your back.
Then they did a barbell jump squat, which is exactly as it sounds, a barbell on your back, like
you're going to do a squat and you jump with it.
Then a standard barbell bench press or supine press or whatever he would have called it at that
point in time.
And then a barbell clean, a barbell standing calf phrase, a bent over barbell row, a barbell
conventional deadlift.
So we've got 2 deadlifts here.
And then concluding with a barbell squat, single sets of each.
What do you make of that?
So let me analyze this in two ways.
Since we introduced it as an athletic program, I'm going to start by treating as a bodybuilding
program because, you know, we can kind of just ignore the jump squat and the clean and then just
look at it and go, you've got 10 exercises there.
You know, what's the coverage of those?
So as always, I think that back training is is poorly served by many of these routines.
You've got a wide grip row, which is not really any that at all.
And you've got a pullover which is part of the complex, which is the only other thing that's really
doing you a decent kind of back training apart from the deadlift variation.
You know, there's no kind of proper social plane pull here apart from the the pullover and there's
no frontal plane pull.
I'd say the back training part of it is definitely weak.
And you know what, I think think that's fairly normal for Hoffman.
I need to go back and look at some of his other work now, but I don't think in any of the Hoffman
plans we've looked at, there's been much back work.
You know, on the pressing side, it's OK, We've got an overhead press.
We've got a bench press.
You know, there's probably a little bit missing that, you know, because you probably can't get full
coverage with just those two.
But you know, it's a really good a really good start, especially if it's a basic program.
You know, I've got a deadlift variation, which I've been critical of.
Again, not very much hamstrings work.
Just having a stiff leg in there is fantastic to see that.
So you know, pleased.
I mean, really, if you've kind of got a stiff leg deadlift in the squat, you kind of well on your
way to maximizing lower body muscle growth with only a barbell.
I think, you know, you kind of you've, we've done a really good job there already with those two.
So you know, with those two in place where there's two presses, military and bench press and then
you know, if you'd thrown in a couple of decent back exercises for me that would be, you know,
starting to look like a pretty decent and a basic hypertroid programme with limited equipment.
Obviously car phrase standing fine for gastroc and there's not really much else in there to talk
about.
I don't see the point in having multiple deadlift variations in that really is going to do very
much.
Yeah, I wonder if he just did that because of his sort of bias towards weightlifting and
international deadlifting.
So you know, from a, from a bodybuilding point of view with limited equipment, maybe just a barbell,
I would say this could be improved.
You know, take the athletic exercise or the the ballistic exercises out.
It could still be improved.
I think from a from a hypertroy point of view with a bit more back exercise, focus on intelligent
programming for the back exercises and maybe drop in the conventional deadlift out.
So if one didn't have access to a pull up bar and you just had a barbell so you would just add in an
additional bent over grow just with a closer grip.
I think that would be a definite way to move forwards, but honestly web bars are probably easier to
get hold of and install than barbells US.
Yeah.
I wonder how because back then obviously as you pointed out, there wasn't a lot of people
programming pull ups until you had these sort of full gym type programs where they might even
include some machines as well.
And I wonder, I mean, obviously it's so hard to, you know, you can use a, you know, a piece of wood
outside.
There's a fixes.
Exactly, there's a.
Treat wasn't.
Popular, complicated.
It's not it's not a difficult thing to do.
So I don't think it's really kind of Fair to kind of go, well, we haven't got a pull up by mate.
No, that's not not not an acceptable, not an acceptable, you know, kind of a complaint.
So that would be no, just treating it as a bodybuilding routine, treating it as an athletic routine,
It's horrible.
It's absolutely horrible.
I mean, this, it is this is going to fit really, really well with the podcast that comes out on
Wednesday in high performance Physiology where we actually start to explain why the proximal to
distal sequence means that when you're picking exercises for purposes of an athletic development
premise, especially hypertrophy exercises, you need to be very careful about which muscles you're
trained.
So this is a myth that I think some fitness influencers who right programs for bodybuilding have
been perpetuating.
They've been saying that, you know, if you're an athlete, just play your sport and, you know, do my
bodybuilding programming, you'll be fine.
Absolutely not.
That isn't going to work because as an athlete, you want almost to focus the maximum amount of your
hypertrophy training on proximal segments because those are the segments that move more slowly in
the context of athletic movements.
If you're looking at the more digital segments, they're moving too fast to really contribute
anything in terms of their overall athletic activity.
Fast movements mean you can't really exert force and very effectively.
So you want to be focusing on the proximal stuff.
Explain this in a lot to more detail, physiologically in detail in the out, and the podcast will
come out on Wednesday.
I look at this and I'm like, no, you're going to, yes, the stipulate data is fantastic because
that's giving you a lot of hip extensive development, hamstrings and productors.
But I'm going to need a hip thrust in there really because I need the glute to really be, you know,
really maximally developed.
I don't really want to focus much on the quads, you know, So squat is OK, but I wouldn't want to go
overboard and I absolutely don't want carburetors in there, which is why.
You explain with the proximal distal anyway, so that's essentially the furthest away you could get
and it's going to slow you down sprinting I imagine.
Exactly.
Exactly.
Or kicking or basically, Yeah, OK.
So, you know, and then, and then there's, there's no rotational stuff in here.
I've got a side to side bend, but I need a rotational movement of of load to actually enable me to
develop force producing capacity and rotation.
You know, that's again, something that is often ignored, you know, and I'm when we talk about
applications of various in this in the podcast that's coming out soon, we talk about, you know, when
you're thinking about hip extension and and proximal muscle mass exerting force on things, you've
got to then think about, well, how am I transferring that?
Now?
The lower body does a pretty good job that automatically just the way it's set up, but the upper
body is not so good.
So if you've got a situation where you're trying to extend the hip and OK, maybe you've just got
your upper body that you're trying to move around, that's not too much mass in many situations.
Are they?
Sure there are some people who've got heavy upper body in some sports because it requires that.
But you know, often the athlete is just flicking around the upper body.
It's not such a big deal.
But if you have a situation where the athlete is resisted at that top end of the torso, like for
example, in a grappling sport or in rugby in a scrum situation, in those kind of situations, you're
actually going to need to be able to keep the torso from, you know, kind of bending in different
directions.
And that's when you start to need the ability to actually, you know, you know, have exercises are
going to stop that.
Now, there's a little bit in here of that because deadlift variations aren't, you know, horrible in
that respect.
But I would also want something like a good morning in there because I'd actually want that
resistance specifically, you know, to be trained, the ability to keep that torso in that position
while using the hip extensors.
Again, not just about it's, it's not just about saying, Oh yeah, we need to add much muscle mass on
the athletes as possible.
It's about saying where do I want that?
And when athlete, you want it mostly proximally.
You don't really want it going too far away from your kind of core sort of torso and hip.
It's an interesting rhetoric and again, I don't want to take so go down this path too much because
you have a whole podcast on it, but it's the world I grew up in.
That was the narrative.
It was saying, hey, if you have an athlete, you don't need to know how to program for that athlete.
You need to need to know how to program to get someone strong and build muscle and all the athletic
stuff they'll do with the athletic coach.
And I think ultimately I feel like it just came out of laziness out of a well, I don't want to have
to learn about all the these different sports and how to program effectively fool them.
So I'm just going to stick to this one thing that I know how to do, which is this program general
hypertrophy.
Well that's the same as hypertrophy.
Research is not wanting to learn about fatigue for psychomagnosis or, you know, any of the other
things that they don't learn about because they're, you know, lazy.
Well, I don't know what the hell, but they don't learn about those things, you know?
That's convenient if you have a nice narrative that makes it.
Sound very convenient when you look at it and somebody goes, oh, those things aren't relevant.
I'm like, oh, it's very convenient that you think they're not relevant because it means you don't
have any work to do on those things.
But yeah, yeah, I mean, the point I'm making is that, you know, an athletic program is always going
to focus the development of muscles more approximately.
And so if you just have a typical bodybuilding program, it's not going to work for them because
you're not going to have the same focus on hip thrusts and stiff legs and good mornings.
And you know, kind of maybe sort of back work as is a complete absence of back work in this program.
But you know, it's going to be exercise selection thing first and foremost.
And you know, you're athletes going to end looking different.
One thing I didn't say on the podcast that's going to come out on Wednesday that I kind of chatted
about with, we joked about before we recorded and I was talking with Rob, is that I think there's
this tendency in the fitness industry to believe everything they see.
Let me explain what I mean.
So one of the questions I get when I answer athletic questions on my Instagram, I get a bunch of
people.
Like for example, I answered some questions on Instagram the other day and I said sprinters don't
actually have bigger quads than many other athletes.
You know, they actually have relatively small quads and huge hips and hip extensors and hip flexors.
And I had a bunch of people message me saying every time I see a sprinter on TV, they've got
gigantic quads.
I'm like, OK, So what you're telling me is that the cameraman who is filming that event is showing
you pictures of people with big quads.
And that makes you think that what you see is all there is, which is a famous, a kind of
psychological bias, you know, sort of coined by Daniel Connor.
What you see is all there is.
So you think that because you'll see every time you see a sprinter on TV, they've got huge quads.
You think that all the printers have huge quads.
Well, imagine that you're a cameraman at an event.
You know, like when you've probably seen this on sporting events, cameramen tend to point the camera
at things that they think the audience is going to want to see.
So they don't just point the camera at whatever there is.
So they're not just kind of randomly scanning the crowd.
If you've got a cameraman pointing camera, the crowd, they'll pick out people who are photogenic,
who are doing something interesting, who kind of arouse emotion the crowd is interested in seeing.
The same thing happens when you're at a sporting event.
The cameraman will point the camera at things that he thinks are impressive, interesting, that the
audience will resonate with.
So when you're looking at like sporting events on TV and you've got every time I look at this
athlete or these athletes on TV, they've got this characteristic.
I'm like, maybe that's just what the cameraman is pointing his camera at.
You know what you and you've, you're engaging in a psychological bias of what you see is all there
is.
In other words, you don't think about things that you're not seeing.
So you're saying you're telling me if I Google runners quads and look at the images that's not
representative of the average runners quads?
I don't believe that that's.
Not right, Exactly.
So what happens is you end up believing that the information you're being shown because ultimately
if you think about it, if you go back, you know, you know, sort of thousands of years, what you saw
then was pretty much all there is all there was because that was your environment.
You saw everything.
Everything there was to see.
You saw it more or less.
Now you're getting like tailored kind of snippets of information being shown you on a screen and
it's highlights of what people think you're interested.
And as a result, you get this extremely skewed version of what you think reality is.
And I think this is one of those wonderful examples of how that phenomenon is starting to shape
people's expectations.
And that's why I get these messages from people saying, you know, oh, I, you know, every time I see
a runner or a sprinter, they've got huge quads.
I'm like, here is a study showing that sprinters don't have huge quads.
That's a cross-sectional study done, you know, kind of literally measuring, you know, the the sizes
of muscles in sprinters and comparing them with, you know, either other athletes or sedentary people
or whatever.
And the quads really don't pop out as being a muscle that's way bigger than any of these others take
senses.
And Netflex is absolutely off the charts in these sprinters compared with, you know, sort of.
Which is interesting in and of itself.
Of itself.
Is that due to what they're doing in the weight room, or is that actually due to other stuff they're
doing?
Well, to a certain extent, the sprinter is going to to increase muscle size in the hip extensors and
flexors from sprinting because you get eccentric loading.
You know, I mean, people forget that, you know, eccentric loading is going to create, you know,
muscle growth even when it's fast, don't tend to get the same benefits from the concentric phases.
But yeah, they're also doing a lot of weight room stuff.
But remember, this is survivorship bias.
To a certain extent, the best sprinters are going to have the big hip flexors and extensors.
Even if they were, I'm going to say born like that, but like, you know, kind of.
Genetically tending in that direction because that's what makes them faster.
So you're going to observe them again, you have to.
When you're making observations, it's really, really important to establish what you're observing
and how it is possible for people to have ended up in that situation.
If you have a competitive scenario, people are going to end up in that highly competitive scenario,
not just because they've done stuff, but because they are just built like that.
But either way, you know, it's kind of fitting with what we already know.
Bio Mechanics was printing which I will obviously covering the high performance Physiology podcast
at some point, which is that you're you kind of want proximal muscle mass and you know, in the case
of sprinting, it's hip flexor and hip extensor muscle size that does that job.
Planning to get into looking forward to listening to the episode.
So today, what are we talking about?
Something completely and utterly different.
Really.
Today I'd like to.
I mean, we're going to probably do this as a 2 parter, I think we said.
And this will be the first two parter.
Is it?
OK, I believe so.
Yeah.
So.
We're going to talk about insufficient sleep today and again probably next time.
And the interesting thing here is that, OK, so let me start with a couple of quick definitions so
that people listening can set this in context and understand how it relates to what they're going to
find in the literature.
So I'm using the term insufficient sleep, which is not used in the literature.
And I'm doing that deliberately because I want to kind of just have a generic terminology that
doesn't have a specific, you know, kind of numerical meaning to it.
In the literature you'll find the terms sleep deprivation and separately sleep restriction.
Now there's a little, now there's a little bit of confusion over that mouth and explain what it is.
So normally in human studies, deprivation refers to no sleep at all.
So you're testing the effects of like a lack of sleep, insufficient sleep, and you just ask people
not to sleep for the whole night.
And then you do some tests following day separately, you can have sleep restriction, which is where
you kind of go in and wake them up after like maybe 4 hours.
So usually it's around about half the night of sleep that you would normally get.
So you can have sleep deprivation, you have sleep restriction.
I'm using the term insufficient sleep to capture all of that for reasons that I'll explain later on.
Now, the complexity or the annoyance arises in two respects.
Firstly, if you look at sleep deprivation models in animals, generally speaking, it's not always a
complete lack of sleep of any kind.
They'll still use the term sleep deprivation because what they're doing is they're stopping R.E.M.
sleep from happening.
Now there's a couple of different ways of doing this.
One of the most kind of elegant ways is that they have a sort of a an environment sort of a cage.
If you like this rats and it'll have separate segments of the cage at different heights.
So you've got like some of you multiple platforms equate with multiple platform method.
And essentially there's multiple kind of heights and the heights of the platforms change overtime.
So some of them are slightly higher, some are slightly lower.
And what they've got in the cage is a level of water which is above the level of the lowest segments
and below the level of the highest segment.
And So what happens is the rodent will be sitting on one of these platforms that's dry.
But in time, the platform will drop below the level of the water and it wakes it up and it will
wander over and sit on the other platform that's dry.
So what it does is it stops the rat from getting more than about however many minutes of sleep at a
time, and it stops it going into R.E.M. sleep.
So it's actually really, really clever because it mimics what you might expect to find in a rodent
environment where water could be coming around.
It takes the stress element out of the shock sort of element of stress out.
So, you know, you could do a sleep deprivation by picking the rat up every time it went to sleep,
but that's very, very stressful.
You know, You know, I've talked before about, you know, kind of stress studies and like people
saying, oh, you know, is this a stressor?
Is exercise a stressor?
And I'm like, you know, and they've got, oh, these rodent studies show that exercises are stressful.
And I'm like, yeah, if you're a hand, if you, if you're a rat sitting in a cage in the hand of God
comes down and pulls you out of the cage, sticks you on a treadmill and pokes you with a stick until
you run, That's stressful.
That would be stressful for me, right?
So you've got to be really careful about these situations of dividing off what's stress and what's
not stressed.
And what I like about the multiple platform model is it actually just uses a very tiny little amount
of water, just enough to wake the rat up and cause it to move to a dry platform where it then goes
back to sleep, but then wakes up again before it goes into R.E.M. sleep.
So you have sleep deprivation in a way that's not actually the complete absence of sleep, it's the
absence of R.E.M. sleep, which is very, very slightly different from what we're talking about in
humans.
But functionally, it kind of ends up in the same kind of place.
And I'm not a sleep expert.
Plenty of other people have talked about it, you know, you know, watch what they have to say.
Hopefully it will support what I'm saying.
Similarly, just on a terminology point, you'll come across the fact that sleep restriction is
sometimes called partial sleep deprivation, which is very frustrating.
But again, that's just terminology.
So if you see this term term partial sleep deprivation, that means sleep restriction.
Otherwise we've kind of got these two separate terms, deprivation restriction 1 meaning no sleep or
at least no R.E.M. sleep, and one meaning partial night of sleep, not a whole night of sleep.
So that's the kind of basic terminology.
You'll also find one other element, technology, which refers to whether or not it's a single night
of no sleep or insufficient sleep or multiple nights of insufficient sleep.
That is the term persistent.
So if you come across the term persistent sleep deprivation, that means multiple nights of no sleep
or at least no R.E.M. sleep.
If you come across the term persistent sleep restriction, that means multiple nights of half a night
of sleep usually.
So that's like the literature that you'll kind of find if you go digging through, especially in
relation to exercise and recovery and that kind of thing.
What I'd like to talk about today, though, and you know, this is kind of not a huge topic really,
but it's what is the impact of a night or multiple nights of insufficient sleep on the workouts that
we're going to be doing.
So I get this question a lot.
People often write to me saying if I have a bad night to sleep, what does that then mean for my
workout I'm going to do the following day?
Just before you go any further, I didn't.
Obviously the plan I discussed at the start of this episode had nothing to do with sleep.
And it's not easy to find silver year plans that have to do with sleep.
But that doesn't mean that sleep wasn't a focal point.
And almost every single book I own on silver year lifting has a segment on sleep and they all talk
about how important sleep is, like it is never overlooked.
Now, what I think is interesting, and I don't know if you'll touch on this in more detail or not,
but I would say like in a traditional sense in the bodybuilding world, it was always highlighted,
hey, sleep matters, you know, rest and recovery.
Obviously that was seen as being important, but part of that was sleep.
And that meant that you needed to be, you know, aimed to get 8-9.
Sometimes people would say as many as 10 hours of sleep a night.
And you know, obviously people would talk about kind of like nighttime habits, not eating too close
to bed, all these things that would make one sleep in a in a better quality.
And my perception, at least online, maybe a little bit more recently is in the hypertrophy world,
people seem to be kind of minimizing the impact of sleep and maybe saying, you know what, maybe it's
not as important as we thought it was, maybe you don't need to worry about it, blah, blah, blah.
And it's interesting that again, if we just look at, well, what did people think before any other
influences, there was certainly a very high emphasis on the importance of sleep.
Yeah.
And I think we can kind of track that over time and understand what the trajectory was of those
ideas.
Because if we start with the silver era, it's like, you know, the programs that they were doing at
the time were absolutely, you know, recoverable in the in the large majority.
It's like, you know, most people are not doing more than three sets per muscle rate per workout and
they're not training more than every so 48 hours, you know, three times a week.
And we're doing sensible for use paranoia group recovery is not like a big deal.
We're going to talk about recovery and sleep next time, but I'm just pointing out that in the
context of the silver era, sleep being important is is is a obviously is on a recognizable feature,
but it's but nobody's claiming it does magical things.
What I think happened as we entered into the post steroid era is that people started saying things
like there's no such thing as overtraining.
There's only under sleeping underneath.
And that's magical thinking because that's what I've been pushing back against.
And people are saying, oh, well, you know, you just have to sleep more.
And I'm like, no, there's a point at which no amount of sleep is going to fix anything now, But
we'll, we'll explain all of that next time the context of occur.
I think that's why we've what we've got now is a reaction against the kind of the 80s idea or 90s
idea that you can sleep your way out of any kind of amount of silly training when they're doing
crazy amounts of sets.
That's not true.
You create a problem of that magnitude.
You can't sleep your way out of it.
That's not to say that sleep isn't doing good stuff.
It's just is a limit to what it can do for you.
So I think that's kind of why it's historically gone.
The trajectory that it's gone.
It's we're having a reaction against that silliness.
But yeah, totally agree with you.
It's like if we can get back to that idea of it being important, but not like some kind of panacea
that fixes every single problem that might be possibly, you know, occurring as a result of your
silly training programs.
Like, you know, it's like it does, it's not get out of jail free card.
It doesn't, it doesn't kind of fix everything.
But anyway, yeah, that would be my perspective on that.
So, but today I just want to point out what is happening with, you know, workout performance, not
recovery from workouts, but actually if I just like randomly have insufficient sleep for one night
or a couple of nights, what's that then doing for a workout that I try and do afterwards?
Well, before I get into the magnitude of the effect, let me just describe the basic physiological
kind of essentially we've got two things that are happening that are are problematic.
Firstly, we start to lose the ability to concentrate on what we're doing and that disrupts our
coordination pattern.
So straight away from an athletic point of view, and this ties into obviously the athletic theme of
this particular episode, but if we're thinking about it from an athletic point of view, we're not
going to be able to improve the motor learning coordination of the athletes skills.
If we are trying to train them in a state of insufficient sleep.
It's going to be disrupted because you need a maximum level of coordination, if not a better level
of coordination than one you've already got stored in the brain to change anything.
The brain isn't going to change your existing motor programs if you don't show it something better
than it's already got.
So you have to be optimizing, you know, kind of the movement pattern in order to make a change.
So insufficient sleep is going to stop by happening and so your skill session is basically
worthless.
So in the examples of where people write to me saying should I go and train after I've been, you
know, sort of out all night, or if should I go and train if I had a, I've had night's sleep, I'm
like, well, what's the goal of the training session?
If you're doing a skilled training session as an athlete, you're trying to get better.
I don't know, free throws or something, don't There's no point.
You're literally better off going back to bed.
I'm not commenting on how sleep restrictions should be fixed.
I'm commenting, you know, not training because it's not going to achieve anything.
You're not going to be able to improve coordination pattern if you are training in a sleep
restricted or sleep deprived state.
It's not going to happen.
Now from a hypertroy point of view, not really that big a deal.
It's not really going to be a problem.
So it's really an athletic problem on the coordination side is not going to have a meaningful effect
in terms of muscle growth.
So I don't think that will be something that I'll be concerned about.
The second thing that happens is that we experience disagreeable sensations which are now obviously
putting us squarely into the territory of supraspinal central nervosity.
So you're now going to experience a drop in moting equipment that's going to stop you from
increasing moting equipment as an adaption.
It's also going to have a small negative effect on hypertrophy.
Do I think the effect on hypertrophy is really big?
Not in the majority of cases, but it's that and it's, you know, kind of physiologically, you know,
verified we've got a situation where we're likely to experience a small more reduction in the
hypertrophy stimulus and definitively large if not complete absence of adaption.
Regarding the large effect work, the absence of the effect on the motive equipment adaption.
So again, it's hitting the athlete a lot harder than it's hitting or strength passing especially
then it's hitting the the the bodybuilder.
So broadly speaking, physiologically, this is much more of an athletic problem than it is a
bodybuilding problem.
As regard to workout performance, we're going to talk about the kind of effects on recovery and
adaptations, you know, in terms of our virtually next time, but you know, just in the workout
performance, I think it's an athletic problem rather than the body.
And then finally, really the only thing I wanted to add is that like with the the pushback you're,
you were mentioning earlier where people are starting to say, you know, we know sleep isn't really a
big deal for bodybuilding.
The issue is that a lot of people have gone to the literature and they've noticed that a single
night of sleep restriction because to to be fair, most of the time when people are talking about
this stuff, they're not talking about working an all nighter.
They're talking about a poor night asleep, Yeah.
Exactly this thing like I was lying there for hours I just couldn't get sleeper.
I woke up a bunch of times and it's like I calculated and maybe have 3 1/2 hours of sleep in total.
And I feel, you know, rough.
So what people have noticed is that the effect of sleep deprivation tends to be pretty negative on
workout performance the following day, whether it's aerobic or or anaerobic or strength training.
In contrast, this effect of a single night of sleep restriction isn't necessarily always a big deal.
And so people have said, oh, well, you know, sleep deprivation is the big thing to worry about.
So as long as you're not pulling all nighters, you can have bad nights of sleep and it doesn't
matter.
And that's where a large number of people are in terms of the influencer community.
I think at the moment, the issue is that if you actually go and look through all of the studies that
exist on this topic, what you'll find is that it's about the amount of sleep that you haven't had
recently that's the problem.
Not a single night that you've just had.
So what you can see is that if you have persistent sleep restriction of say two nights in a row and
you've had only 4 hours per night and you should be getting 8.
If that's, you know, your typical amount of sleep, then what you'll find is that is basically going
to create the same negative effect on the workout as a single night of no sleep of lack of eight
hours because you numerically you've got the same sleep debt.
So what we can see is that broadly speaking, loss of sleep, lack of sleep, insufficient sleep is a
numerical problem.
If you have like an entire week of poor sleep, you're going to be basically in a sleep equivalent of
a sleep deprived state of maybe even two nights in a row, which is as we were chatting before and I
said, I've done this once, absolutely horrific.
You know, it's like one night of sleep, you feel sorry, one night of total sleep deprivation, you
feel rough.
Two nights of sleep deprivation is another world of pain.
It's, it's, it's remarkable, but I would say that if you're not sleeping well for a whole week, you
are going to feel pretty horrible.
Even if it's only partial sleep operation or sleep restriction, it's going to, it's going to create
superspinal CSP, it's going to district coordination plan.
As an athlete, you're not going to be improving motor skills.
You're also not even improving motor unit criminals.
And from a Polywood point of view, you're probably getting a, you're probably losing a small
percentage of the motor units that you're able to access.
You're losing some hypertrophy there.
If you've previously produced hypertrophy and those muscle fibres, you're now going to be an
astrophy state.
You're going to be, you know, kind of losing muscle mass in those particular areas.
So I think the reason for just kind of talking about this today is just to point out that sleeping
forever or, you know, kind of in silly quantities is not a get out of gel free card.
It doesn't fix bad training programs and allow you to do whatever you want to do.
But you know, losing sleep, whether it's full night of sleep that you've lost or whether it's just a
partial night of sleep that you've lost is going to add up and is going to have negative effects.
More on the athletic side, but definitely to a certain extent on the kind of the bodybuilding side,
you know, just much smaller and magnitude because you're only dealing with one adoption you're
worried about rather than three.
I think Poliquin used to, I'm sure other people did too, but I think Poliquin used to talk about
kind of making up for that sleep debt on the weekend.
So maybe you need to have on weekdays, whatever, because of work or other commitments, you're only
sleeping six hours and then on a weekend you might be sleeping 10 or 12 hours or whatever is nice.
So is it potentially some validity to that?
Not that that would be a a, you know, intelligent sort of strategy to try to implement like, you
know, consistently.
But if there were days where one knew that they weren't able to get sleep, you're saying that
actually having some days we have maybe more sleep if you're able to, if you're not just waking up
at the normal time, that could more quickly mitigate and reverse some of that reduction.
Yeah.
So I think there's there's a little bit of data showing that, you know, if you can grab naps here
and there that that does help and making up sleep does help.
I don't think it's a replacement for a proper sheep, a proper sleep schedule.
I mean, that's, that's probably the ideal scenario.
Who?
Yeah, that's what that's one of those questions that's always an interesting one to try and answer.
You know, it's like, because the answer is, well, yes, it's going to help.
But equally, I don't think it gets you back to sort of square 1.
I don't think it is literally exactly the same scenario as if you hadn't gone there in the 1st
place.
I think you're always going to be better off doing it properly.
I don't think you can completely.
Another another kind of similar question would be, you know, if I'm in a sleep restricted state, if
I am suffering from superspinal CNS fatigue, can I use a technique to increase MOTI and accruement
in order to get me back to a higher level of accruement?
The answer is yes.
So, you know, if you're, you know, suffering from a lack of sleep and you feel like your voting
eucrium levels are going to be reduced as a result, can you use motivational techniques?
Can you listen to exciting music?
Can you train with a gym partner?
Can you get psyched up?
Yes, you can do all of those things.
Does that get you back to the point where you would be if you'd done those things from a fresh
state?
Probably not.
But it does absolutely move you in the right direction.
So again, it's like, you know, we're talking about ways to mitigate problems, but equally, you're
not going back to the state that you would have been in if you hadn't have suffered the problem in
the 1st place.
And I think that's the one of the most common misconceptions I see in the industry about any of
these things is like, you know, can I can, I can have completely negate the effects by doing
something else.
And like, yes and no.
You can move in the right direction.
You can absolutely start to fix the problem.
But I don't think you can have a because Physiology just doesn't allow you to have a free lunch,
doesn't work like that.
It's like there has to be a cost of doing business somewhere.
So if we were like a lifelong insomniac and they were consistently in this state of insufficient
sleep.
And then you made a comment before that if someone had been able to access higher threshold mode
units and they grown muscle and those fibers and then they had these, these insufficiency, that
would actually be atrophying.
But in that situation, that person may never have even got to that point because the margins are
translated for them.
Really big foreign trade duration deficits, yeah, no.
So.
They may not notice anything because that is essentially just their baseline.
Sure.
Yeah, yeah, absolutely.
So if someone's listening to this, and that's what I basically find.
That's what baseline is.
Yeah.
So I want to touch on a couple of ways I program to mitigate this in clients.
Obviously my preference is always a day of prioritizing sleep and that I have anecdotally seen big
differences in clients, especially PTS.
PTS is so bad in this because just the work schedule, yeah, often people have early morning clients
might be there at 5:00 AM and then they've got, you know, posts after work clients and they're there
till seven, 8:00 PM.
And I've worked with a lot of coaches where they tell me, hey, I just can't get more than six hours.
And they often think that they've got, you know, other sort of health issues going on and, you know,
chronic fatigue or this out of the other deficiencies, whatever.
And whenever I'm able to convince those coaches to maybe give up those morning sessions or an
evening session or whatever it is to get more sleep, the feedback I consistently get.
And often people fight beyond this like 6 months, like, no, no, no, it's not that.
It's not that.
It's something else.
And then they finally do it and like, Oh my God, I've, I've come alive.
Like I just, I have so much more energy.
I feel normal.
I didn't realize it was that.
So obviously I think that should be the goal is how can we actually achieve consistently good sleep.
But if I did have a client who, you know, an event came up or they just had a poor night's sleep or
whatever it was, some of the suggestions I give to them.
One would be, and this ties into what you said about motivation is I normally get them just to drop
back to a single set and that single set and you know, assuming we're doing a multi set program,
that single set, obviously that's going to get the work done that we needed to get done in terms of
at the very least, they're preventing atrophy in in those fibers.
But hopefully we might even, you know, grow some some new muscle growth in that session and in those
single sets, But it has an extra motivation effect there.
And I think you talked about this maybe last podcast or in some recent podcast where you talked
about doing that single set.
Obviously people see this performance boost so they don't see with multi sets.
So that's something I'm sort of using as a hack, not to be like, oh, you don't have energy to do
multi sets more as a hey, I'm going to give you this as a motivational tool.
You don't know why we're doing it per SE, but I bet that single set is going to perform just as well
as what your normal sets would be in a normal, you know, state of sleep.
And do you have any comment on that?
I was just thinking while you were talking through that, that if you imagine that you've got this
effect, I mean, if somebody, I mean, back up a little bit, one of the questions I get that I don't
always share is people will write to me asking what they should do for them Master's thesis or that
kind of project that they're working on right the way up into, you know, kind of PhD territories.
People will say, how do I, how do I set up an experiment to address this question or in this field,
if somebody's listened to this and they've got the opportunity to do a project, I would be really
fascinated to just see it documented.
The if you're doing three sets to failure, you are going to get fewer reps on your first set than if
you do a single set on its own.
Because I've seen this so many times where you, just, you, you go into the gym and you know, you've
got three sets to do you, you back off your effort levels on your first set.
So you're getting more volume in terms of your 3 total sets, but your first set is definitively
further away from failure than you're, you're, you're, you're capable of actually doing.
And so I just wonder, you know, what physiologically we're seeing different between those scenarios.
You know, I mean, in the model that I'm working on, you know, you, you should just see that you've
got fewer stimulating reps on those first sets than you would have been otherwise.
But the issue is that fatigue mechanisms are building up over the course of those, you know, sets as
you go into the workouts.
Are we losing something by doing multiple sets that we're getting by doing single sets?
I think that thought exercise is something I'm going to spend some time just trying to understand.
I think the effect is probably very tiny, but nevertheless, there is something that I think is, and
certainly on the routine recruitment side, you know, we're obviously going to be able to increase
recruitment to a better extent by doing single sets than doing by doing multiple sets because you're
obviously in a higher level of central mode command than you would be doing otherwise.
So there's something there in terms of recruitment, whether it translates through to hypertrophy, I
don't know.
Presumably though if it was lying for more recruitment then that's going to directly affect.
Well, that's what I'm saying.
I'm not convinced it does allow for more recruitment.
It might just allow for more central motor command and it might just be a little bit more firing
rates, which might not really translate to anything to take.
It as it could just be performance and in that case.
Yeah, it might not really because ultimately you know, we're hitting pretty much maximum recruitment
on on sort of the 5th Rep before failure.
So not sure if.
You were facing motivation and then that was.
Sure.
It's your entire, your entire level of recruitment might jump up.
That's what I'm saying.
There might be a small effect and it might actually be that you're hitting different motor units by
doing that because we do think that just sufficiently increased motivation, it will actually access
more motor units and you are going to get definitively different muscle fibres, big trade.
So to the extent that actually does happen, I'm saying is the effect big enough to trigger that?
I don't know.
Yeah, interesting.
So, and another strategy I use with clients who, you know, maybe have had a bad night or that it's
not feeling that day or whatever is, and it's, you know, for me, as I explained this, it's
interesting looking back or looking over it and thinking are these are all motivational techniques.
Even this single set is a motivational technique.
And I, I don't necessarily put it in that category identified as such, but that's what these are, is
I get clients to identify.
OK, if this is a, you know, you're feeling tired, you're not feeling motivated, We're going to go
get the work done.
What I want you to do is identify like look at your program and look at what is the lift that you
think you actually have the best chance of producing the overloading that day.
You know, maybe last last session it just felt a little bit easy, like it felt good.
And so that is your goal this session.
And so I'm sending them an external goal, and that's just acting essentially as a motivator.
Yeah, I mean, I think, I think, you know, there's, there's lots of ways to motivate people.
I was just laughing at myself.
Actually, I wasn't.
I wasn't laughing at everything you were saying.
I was laughing at myself because I mean, most people who listen to this book us know that for a
number of years I had a pretty unhealthy relationship with pull ups.
So my kind of my my pulling strength, vertical pulling strength is pretty silly.
You know, and for an old man who doesn't look that big, I can move some pretty horrible weight on a
lap pull down.
And, you know, so you know, you're in a commercial gym and there's some big guys monopolizing the
lap pull down.
It is very motivating for me to follow them and go on when they finish the machine and, you know,
put the weight up a few more, you know, kind of a few more selectors and, and pull something that
they were probably fighting with.
You know, there's a number of things that you can do.
I was laughing at myself because I have that horrible habit of doing that.
But it's, it's like, it's not like I can do it on any other exercise.
You know, it's just, I think your history kind of stays with you in, in strength training for, for,
for a number of reasons.
Yeah.
So anything that's motivational, however your personality is constructed, I think, you know,
however, you know, you need to do those things is valuable to consider that in situations where
sleep is is a is a kind of a problem, you know, and everybody's got their own palette of things that
work for them.
View kind of summary posts of various things.
And I'll probably do more in the future, but there's a lot of ways that could increase recruitment.
And we can, we talked about one recently in the carbohydrate mouth rinsing thing, you know, so
anything that reduces discomforting sensations around the, you know, the, the inflammation or
exercise order you were mentioning excise selection, the, the total magnitude of volume that you're
doing, you know, the, of the sensations of low muscle glycoins and all that.
Because you can address all of those things.
You can as a cell do a tissue to some point.
But I think really when people are in situations that they've like said, for example, you've got a
bodybuilder who's preparing for competition, maybe they've got a really high kind of impact
competition that's really important to them coming up.
They want to make sure they do not make any mistakes and, you know, maybe they're worried.
And so they get up all night asleep, you know, and like, OK, well, what can I do right now after
I've woken up in the morning after up all night to sleep?
I've got to work out.
I've got to do today.
What can I do in order to make sure that I lose the least possible, you know, stimulus from this
workout that I'm going into?
Well, that's when you want your CHEAT SHEET of things that is going to maximize, you know, no teen
equipment.
So again, actually this is something that we will do in the in the webinar coming up next Saturday.
You know, we'll say, look, that's the scenario that absolutely happened to you in the period of
dieting that you're engaging in to, you know, sort of get to this competition.
You are going to lose muscle mass.
If you don't make sure that you've got, well, you are going to lose muscle mass really almost
certainly.
But you know, how can we mitigate that and make sure it's as little as possible?
Well, OK, you know, here's a CHEAT SHEET of things that can maximize motivation or increase
recruitment in other ways.
You don't just have to chase the motivation stuff.
You can, as I say, chase the reduce the sensations ideas like, you know, you were describing with,
you know, kind of mitigating the, the producing the volume in the, in the workout and, you know, I
was describing with the carbohydrate maths.
So no, I think there's things that we can do, but at the end of the day, insufficient sleep is
always going to be a problem.
It's just how can they make it the smallest problem possible?
You mentioned napping before.
Have you seen the data on, I don't know what they call it, caffeine naps, where you have coffee
before a nap.
Have you seen any of that research?
It's normally it'll be like cognitive ability and cognitive function.
I've seen titles of studies, I've never actually gone and read them.
I don't want to know.
Caffeine doesn't do anything for me.
I'm one of those non responders.
So I've never been hugely interested in it.
I mean, I've, I've looked at studies showing that it does increase motor equipment, you know, and I
think probably by increasing motivation probably.
But again, it's not been something I've been hugely interested in, in jumping into reading about.
Yeah, because I'm a non responder.
I can, I can kind of either take it or leave it.
Yeah, OK.
It doesn't really excite me.
Well, there seems to be a synergistic effect if one would have caffeine immediately before a nap and
it has to be a short nap.
So, you know, obviously you feel groggy if you sleep for too long, but you know, potentially if
someone I'm not someone who can nap, but if you're someone who can nap, that might be another
strategy you could employ if you've had A and all night, as I mean, before I get to the gym.
I'm not sure whether I can or not.
I think the only times when I I've experienced short periods of sleep that you might describe as
napping as been when I've been traveling and I'm bouncing through time zones and I'm not sure that's
really applicable, you know?
Exactly the same.
Not exactly the same thing.
It's like just sleeping because I haven't had enough sleep.
But yeah, no, I'm not a siesta person particularly.
Now, a final point I want to make or ask you about is sometimes there's a narrative and you touched
on it with athletes to an extent where you said, hey, if you're seeking athletic development, go
back to bed in this sleep.
Now, you often hear people talk about that from a bodybuilding perspective as well, where it's like,
hey, if and your coaches say this kind of stuff, but it's like if you've got, you know, you've had a
bad night's sleep, you're not feeling good that day.
You're just not in the mood.
Like, you know, it's going to be a poor session, don't do it.
And in fact, that's not necessarily.
Good advice.
I don't think that's right because you're going to, well, I mean we'll go into detail on this next
time, but I think you're going to be in territory where you're reducing your workout frequency by
doing that and that's going to create an atrophy problem and that will be exacerbated by the sleep
loss, which we'll talk about next time.
The point here is that we can mitigate a lot of the problems that relate to bodybuilding with
strategies that increase motor equipment, including the motivational stuff, so we don't need to go
down the route of saying it's going back to bed territory.
I.
Wouldn't mention though is if if somebody is building that bodybuilding workout around freeway
exercises, especially ones with barbells that are requiring more coordination, I would be much more
nervous about just saying go ahead, go for it, do the best you can because I think that territory is
in a scenario where your coordination is going to cause problems for you.
Sure.
And that'll especially be, you know, if someone's transporting or doing some of these more complex
lifts.
If someone's doing a bench, it's probably not going to be a concern.
I always found bench quite technical, but.
Yeah, I know we've had this conversation.
I shouldn't use that as an example.
I was going to say, I do wonder if some of these sort of over emphasis on that idea go back to bed
is rooted in progressive overload and sort of this idea that if you don't progressively overload a
session, you go backwards in a session, then that session was a waste.
That mentality from my perspective, it's like saying, well, we know that being active during the day
is going to cause less atrophy than bed rest.
And it would be like saying, well, you should just go lay in bed instead of being active.
Well, no, obviously, because higher levels of activity is going to maintain some muscle.
So even if there were some detriment in performance in that session, well, you're still maintaining
all the muscle that you were actually able to activate and use in that session, even if it were
slightly less than normal.
And I think your previous solution is probably the best one in that scenario is go to the gym and if
you're normally a multiple sets person, do single sets.
Now I think that would be the example of.
So if you're normally doing two or three sets, just go to the gym and do a single set of everything
that you would normally do and do the best you can and come home.
And it's like, you know, no, you haven't made progressive overload.
You can't possibly make progressive overload because you weren't doing the same thing as you were
doing previously.
So you've got no bench line benchmark to to kind of assess it against, but at least you've kind of
prevented that with mapping.
You can just now drop back into normal schedule and it's just like you've time.
You've neither moved forward nor backwards.
Actually might have been a little way forwards, but not not necessarily very much.
Insignificant.
Yeah.
The only time in my mind that I would think, oh, maybe there's some merit to not doing that would be
if my schedule allowed me to train the following day.
And I know, OK, I'm not, I'm not, you know, waiting 2.
Days.
Even then you're still doing a 24 hour atrophy issue on you.
But yes, if you were previously training every other day or three times a week, you would have been
literally showing up just after the stimulus.
Here it ends.
You're now inserting 24 hours of atrophy, which you didn't need to do.
Yeah, I guess I'll be thinking about it.
If this is happening once in a blue moon, it's like, well, if there were some fatigue present, then,
you know, one extra restake here and there's not going to be detrimental.
But, you know, if this is something that's happening once a week, you know that every every Saturday
night you're going out dancing and you're not getting back to, I don't know what time you get back.
But yeah, I guess that's the situation where you'd say, well, no, we're going to stick to this
normal frequency.
Yeah.
I mean, again, it's we're describing scenarios in which you know, it's a small negative effect
unless it's, you say, happening every week as a small negative effect.
But I do still think that your original solution would better.
Single set.
Yeah.
I think that's probably it from a performance side for sleep.
So we are going to be covering Part 2, atrophy, recovery, hypertrophy, all of that side of things.
Week is going to break some paradigms for people, I think.
Yeah, we are going to.
And this is not.
This is not a small amount of Physiology.
There is a large chunk of Physiology relating to the effects negative effects of sleep on muscle
mass directly, and there's quite a bit less, but still meaningful amounts on the negative effects of
sleep on recovery post workout.
I think most people instinctively kind of grasp the idea that poor sleep is going to slow down their
recovery post workout.
But I don't think many people know that if they go without sleep or they have restricted sleep for a
meaningful period of time, they're actually going to start to see atrophy happening directly as a
result of that sleep loss.
And I think that is absolutely going to cause some people to flip out.
So it'd be fun to to do that episode, but looking forward to it.
Yeah, I think it's going to be an interesting one.
I think it was good to be eased people in today.
But yeah, come back next week because it's it is.
I think it's going to ruffle some for this.
Yeah.
Anyway, we'll see all of you or not see you.
We'll hope that you hear us all next week.
Thanks for joining us.