Episode: 020 How to program a muscle specialisation phase
URL: https://open.spotify.com/episode/42d9S4MPPIuXUNoKfRyZnr
Published: 2025-10-06
================================================================================

Welcome back everyone to another episode of Hypertrophy, past and present.
Thank you all for joining us.
Chris, how are you doing today?
I'm doing well, thanks, Jake.
It's much nicer to be doing this first thing in the morning instead of lasting at night.
I'm definitely not a night owl, so it's good to be back in the other side of the world and.
Pretend we all know you're not ow.
I made the joke last time that it's kind of like displaying darts on the on on a clock of what time
we're going to be doing it.
So we've held true to that and we've picked another totally random time today.
So next time it's probably going to be my midnight, who knows, but bit of fun.
And I'm not going to do another Bridge Park program today.
I was going to pretend that I was, but I didn't want to expose you to that.
So I'm sure we'll have another one in the future.
But today we have a, we do actually have a plan that we have talked about the author before, but
it's been quite a long time and we've only talked about one of his plans in the past as far as I'm
aware.
So that is Piri Radar.
Now.
I gave him a little bit of a bio last time we talked about him, but basically he was the founder of
Iron Man magazine and he was the contributor, the author of the owner of Iron Man for a very long
time, decades.
And Iron Man was one of the most influential magazines in both the silver and the golden era of
bodybuilding.
There was obviously a couple other competitive magazines at that time, but a lot of kind of more, I
guess you would say advanced or secialization techniques or kind of cutting edge type methods that
were being used.
A lot of them were coming out of Iron Man O Eri did do some interesting work even with things like
isometric training, like he was talking about that pretty early on.
He was talking about sort of rest pause and cluster typesets, similar methods we talked about last
week.
So a lot of more, I guess creative type methods were were coming out of some periods work.
Now the plan I want to talk about today.
This was in one of his books and not actually in Iron Man magazine, but in a book that he published.
And it was a, it was a specialization phase.
And I've mentioned the past, whether these specialization phases worked is that were usually done as
part of a full body plan.
So this was a leg specialization routine.
And so you would add this onto your full body routine, you would take out the legwork of that full
body plan and you would add this in instead.
So I'm not gonna talk about the rest of the, the full body stuff because that would be whatever plan
you were following.
But this is a, the leg part of that plan.
So it was leg specialized.
It wasn't just quads or hams or glutes, whatever.
It was the entire leg specialization.
A, I believe was published in 1955, his book, the Ironman Bible course Book.
And as was generally the case for a period, a lot of people at this time, he was recommending full
body three times per week.
And so this plan or this specialization would have been done three times per week.
So we've got 6 exercises and although they do double up a little bit, you'll see what I mean.
And we started with a flat foot barbell squat.
We then went into a stiff leg deadlift into a heels elevated squat, and then we went back, back into
the stiff leg deadlift, back into the flat foot squat and then back into the stiff leg deadlift and
that was it.
Now it's an interesting order.
Like it's not he didn't just repeat three exercises, you know, one time through and then a second
time through.
It's he a change order.
And I think it's, it's an interesting sort of, I'm interested to hear your thoughts on it because I
think that there's some intuitive decision making in that.
But as far as sets and reps goes, he did recommend about 10:00-ish repetitions.
He was a little bit flexible with repetitions and a lot of his work he would sort of talk about the
double progression and usually starting at 10, going up to 12 and then dropping back down to 8 or 9
or 10.
So there's a fair bit of flexibility there, but somewhere around the 10 repetition sort of mark.
And he did say that some people may struggle doing this a third time per week and and they may
actually get better results doing it twice a week instead.
How do you feel about that?
So I guess first thing is to notice that we do have a deadlift variation and a stiff leg deadlift
variation of that, which is different from a lot of the other programs we looked at in the past
where for some inexplicable reason, we tended to not see those sort of types of exercise.
Which I always thought was strange because it's like one of the simplest because we're dealing with
a period of time in which we don't have access to the machines and all of the equipment that we
would normally associate with with this kind of activity.
So, you know, it's always surprising when you look at the silver era and you're like, where are the
deadlift variations?
Because you've just literally got a bubble on the floor.
You should be picking a bubble up off the floor.
So it's it's cool straightaway just to see that we've got that, you know, and obviously with it
being stiff leg, that's also pretty cool because, you know, it does definitively give you that
hamstrings stimulus that you wouldn't get if you started to have a bent knee, a variation whether a
knee is extending, you're not going to get the hamstrings really contributing very much.
So, you know, straight away you can kind of look at that and go, OK, we've got a nice program that's
going to have a decent chunk of the glutes and quads in from the squat side of things and a decent
chunk of well, Doctor Magnus as well, obviously, and a decent chunk of Doctor Magnus and hamstrings
in the stiff like deadlift variation.
So from a kind of holistic lower body point of view, you know, yes, I can see why you might build a
program around those two exercises.
Now, you know, from our perspective today, would that make the most sense?
Probably not, because we've got so much more, you know, kind of machinery that we can access, that
we can, you know, train lots of different things in different ways.
We've got, you know, a lot more understanding of how the lower body is going to respond to, you
know, those different exercises separately.
But ultimately, I think if you were to just sort of start with, you know, how can I sort of build a
program based on a couple of barbell exercises, you know, that would probably be a really good
start.
Now, if I were writing it today, they would say to me, you know, you literally just got a barbell
and you you've got to write the program for the lower body.
I would probably have a hip thrust or a glute bridge in there as well.
But you know, fundamentally squat, stiff leg, deadlift and hip thrust I think would be fantastic as
a lower body kind of program built around barbell exercises.
Obviously, you know, still those two is a really good kind of step in the right direction.
But I'm interested to see why you think that the the ordering makes a difference, because I'm not
seeing that.
So what turns out to me there because initially when I saw it as like, man, you've kind of made this
confusing for the sake of being confused, why not just hate it?
Yeah.
But what we've got, so we've got the flat foot squat twice, we've got this the heels elevator squat
once and then we've got this stiff leg dead at least three times.
So it's interesting that we've got 1 variation for the hands and that that hatching exercise is
getting repeated 1/3 time.
But because we've got 2 quad exercises, we're doing one of them twice and the other one once.
So he's still managed to evenly split the volume the six sets across both hands and quads by making
the odd there exercise waiting uneven, if that makes sense.
I mean, I would, I would be interested to hear what you think is happening with the change in the
foot position on the squat because my gut feel, I don't think there's a lot of data on this, but my
gut feel is that, you know, it's not changing a lot really.
I mean, it might change the relative involvement of the hips and the knees a little bit depending on
the resulting position you end up with.
Do you have an image of the of that of that?
I don't because his he sketches and they were not necessarily that helpful.
Describe it at all anymore.
I don't have the description in front of me.
I'll come back to you on that one.
Unfortunately it'll be a Part 2.
I do know the image I had in my mind of his little sketches are that the elevated squat was very low
and I do believe he made the instruction to go effectively as low as you can without your lumbar
grounding.
Now I forget how deep he was suggesting the flat foot squat, but that's my understanding with the
heels elevator was that would be a very sort of deep squat.
Possibly more knee dominant and so actually.
That's my recollection as well is his heels were together I believe.
Yeah, I mean, the, my, my gut feel is that that that type of squat was targeting more quadriceps and
less hip extensors.
That's, that's my gut feels.
You could argue, you know, it might be something equivalent to dropping between a back squat or
alternating between a back squat and a front squat or something like that.
It's kind of the idea is that you're kind of shifting a little bit from from hip extensors to to
knee extensors.
Now honestly, I don't think that, well, I think that for most people, most of the time the back
squat is still going to be in the extensive dominant movement no matter what you do.
I think there are situations in which people can turn it into a hip extensive dominant movement of
just about, but I think it's borderline.
So honestly, I don't see an enormous difference between those exercises.
Do you not think to, even if that's true by doing the hills elevated squat, if it was you know he
would say he was keeping the toss a very vertical and knows like a lot of knee bend in that
exercise, will he be potentially getting less glute than he would be doing kind of flat in how we
would assume he'd be performing a flat foot squat?
I'm not sure whether I would say less glute specifically, but I think it's likely that there will be
a there will be a ratio difference definitively a ratio difference of hip extensor to knee extensor
between those two squat variations.
Yes, I think you'd get more knee extensor to hip extensor ratio in the heels elevator squat than you
would do in the back squat to stand the back squat.
So if that hills elevator squat were another flat foot variation, considering he's got multiple sets
of a hinge movement in there, could it tip one over the edge a little bit?
Well, I guess what I'm saying is I I don't think it's going to make that much difference either way.
Honestly, given that he's doing a hinge variation anyway, I would probably back off on the hip
extensor dominant squat variation.
I would probably just move towards a more need.
I'm going to.
Yeah.
So you could have actually done more of the heels.
Yeah, yeah, between at least one would be better.
More sense, yeah, sure, it would make more sense because you would probably use less load for a
deeper squat, which is very beneficial situation for those guys who are operating with minimal kind
of equipment and you know, having to use lighter loads in order to be able to get the Barber in
place and those kind of things.
So, you know, I think practically speaking, it would make more sense to me to just go all in on the
deeper squat, which is more quadriceps dominant with the heels elevated or front variation or
whatever you want to do and separate the two out and push in different directions.
And I think ultimately that's, that's kind of what we've always been talking about with neuro
mechanical matching with excise selection.
It's like this idea of, you know, figure out what it is you're trying to train with the exercise and
go all in on that thing because that'll get you the best results for what you're actually doing.
You start spreading out the stimulus across larger parts of the body you're not going to get,
especially when you're already training those other parts of the body with another exercise.
Well, that's that's the assumption, right?
If you weren't doing that, then it could make sense.
Like I like the idea of having a back squat in even if you were then to have a leg ascension or
something that's a little bit more quad, sort of more isolated because you are getting that broad
stimulus and you're kind of getting that, you know, diffuse stimulus for passive, even for lumbar or
for whatever that you might not be getting.
Well, this is this is a question that you and I have talked about offline a number of times, which
is this idea of saying, you know, you've got you've got the purpose of the exercise, which is a
particular muscle group or even a muscle within a muscle group.
You know, you do that exercise for that purpose.
But then some exercises like the squat especially, and the deadlift, right pause, things like that.
They train other stuff that we don't talk about because it's not like a clearly defined muscle group
that we're kind of targeting.
It's just kind of like somewhere else.
Like you're standing there with this ridiculous weight on your back or you're pulling a ridiculous
weight off the floor.
There's stuff being trained there that you don't see on your list of muscle groups that you're
you're targeting.
And I think that's a really interesting point.
You know, and I know you've done some kind of anecdotal or data collection on yourself on in a way
you're saying, well, if I take squat out of my routine, how does that change my body composition?
How does that change the way I look?
Yeah, I think that's really, really interesting kind of ideas where you're saying, look, just
standing under that ridiculous heavy barbell puts a hypertrophic stimulus on small muscle areas that
we just don't list out on our target muscle groups for the purposes of bodybuilding training.
But it still creates muscle mass increases over time.
And you see these little lean mass increases which you can't really pin down to being in one of your
major muscle groups that you're training.
And it's literally just because that exercise places large chunks of the body under load that aren't
necessarily, you know, kind of clearly definable parts of the body that we're training for
bodybuilding.
And I think it's really, really interesting kind of idea where you say, you know, yes, on the one
hand, we are training, you know, specific muscles and isolating that isolating is the wrong word.
But targeting that with specific exercises that do specific things is usually the best approach for
the purpose of growing that muscle.
But equally, if you're talking about whole body muscle mass increments, that's a separate question.
That's where you might want to just have one or two of these big kind of exercises in there if
that's your goal.
But again, are you targeting shape?
Are you targeting muscle mass or are you talking a particular look or are you just, yeah, are you
just literally wanting more mass overall?
There's these are separate questions.
Everybody's got to answer their own question for their own purposes.
Yeah, it's it's almost the fact that an exercise is like like a squat, for example, a back squat.
The fact that it's not the best quad builder is exactly, in my opinion, what makes it a valuable
exercise, you know, or a deadlift variation.
The fact that it's not necessarily the best hamstrings or whatever is what makes it valuable because
you're getting that diffuse stimulus.
And I think that one critique I would have of how I see a lot of quote UN quote science based
lifting nowadays, setting out programs, a lot of the time there is an emphasis on these, you know,
just purely single joint exercises, unilateral exercises, exercises that are using quite minimal
loads.
And there's sort of a, you know, overlooking, I guess some of these more multi joint exercises or
these exercises like you've explained that might just be actually providing similar muscles we're
not actually thinking about totally, I mean.
There's, there's obviously a lot more muscles in the body than we tend to list out when we're doing
bodybuilding training.
But again, I mean, you can get around a lot of that by better exercise variety, which is something
we'll come back to later on.
It's just, you know, it's just a very useful kind of, and you know, this is something that I do a
lot when we're talking about problems and trying to analyse them.
It's just trying to widen the perspective and go, am I seeing the entirety of this problem or am I
just kind of, you know, only looking at a tiny part of it?
And I think what we're doing here is trying to widen our perspective briefly, take a step back and
go, what is the bigger, you know, kind of sort of perspective here?
And talking about the squats in this in this context is a really great example of of how we can
widen our perspective and go, you know, yes, we tend to talk about training specific muscles and the
best ways to do that, and that's totally valid.
But that doesn't mean that something like a squat with a more diffuse stimulus isn't doing something
interesting that's worth thinking about.
You know, I'm never going to argue that a squat is a better exercise for training the quadriceps
than something that has less total muscle mass.
You're just not going to get there because the motor equipment levels aren't going to be high enough
to compete.
But it's still doing something interesting from a different perspective.
But again, depending on the person, you know, if somebody has a particular look that they're going
after and that diffuse kind of stimulus doesn't serve that look, then it's not going to work for
them now.
Whereas if somebody is literally just going, well, I, no, I don't really care about the look, I want
the muscle mass across the whole body and that's what I am interested in.
Then actually then something like a squat is really interesting to include in your routine because
it's going to sort of get parts that other exercises can't reach.
You know, it's, it's, it's just going to kind of sort of load things that you wouldn't otherwise be
able to load.
And I think a rack pull probably does something similar, but from the opposite kind of loading
direction.
Yeah, those.
Are the two exercises I use in my plans for that purpose.
So I'll normally include at least one.
Often I'll include both.
My personal favorite way to program and and a lot of my plans should reflect this is to have if I
say I'm doing full body AB to have one day, which is all just those single joint exercises and
another day which is basically just these multi joint exercises.
I think that's the best of both worlds.
And for me looking at it's kind of very Reg Park combined with Steve Reeves.
You know, Steve, we've talked about his plan where it was multiple exercises per muscle single set.
A lot of it was biased in particular parts of the muscle.
And then we look at a lot of Regis stuff and a lot of it's, you know, behind the neck pressing and
bench pressing and squatting and these big multi joint exercises.
And I think, hey, if we take both, mash them together, I think we've got a pretty good plan.
Yeah, again.
Depending on what your particular goals are, because I think, I think the look, the look will be
slightly different, you know, I think, but ultimately, you know, it's, it's just again about just
saying what physiologically is happening.
And then, you know, what do I want?
And then putting those two two things together and, and letting the the physiological reality serve
the goals that you're trying to achieve.
But yeah, just widening our perspective and trying to sort of see what is what the possibilities are
that are available to us.
The last point I wanted.
To make in this plan is I would have loved for the one of those stiff lake deadlifts to be Romanian
deadlift if we had that I'd be quite happy and you're kind of not shaking your head but you're not
you're not sold on that well I'm.
Not sold.
The reason I'm not sold on that is I'm always a bit.
So before, before we came on the podcast, we were just talking through a whole range of different
ideas of what we could talk about and not necessarily in this podcast, but in future podcasts.
And we've got because we've got lots of lots of interesting things floating around in terms of ideas
and topics that we've been working on talking about.
And one of the topics that we've got lined up as something to talk about is this idea that multi
joint exercises often have a certain amount of variability in them about where the stimulus is
actually going to end up.
And that can vary between people, you know, And it just kind of is one of those features of neuro
mechanical matching.
And for me, when I look at the RDL, I'm always kind of a bit uncertain about where the stimulus is
going to go.
And so straight away I'm like, you know, is that a reliable exercise that does the same thing in
every person?
No, it's not.
It's going to do something different in in different people.
The back squat is kind of like an RDL, but a little bit more reliable in the sense that you kind of
know where the stimulus is going to go.
It's going to go to the quadriceps and the adductor Magnus and the glutes.
And it's kind of, yes, you're going to get a quadriceps stimulus as your priority.
And most people, most of the time, probably not in everybody all the time, but most people, most of
the time, it's going to be priority limiting factors in the quadriceps.
And then you're going to have the adoptive Magnus being the primary hip extensor and the glue is
just going to kind of help where it can.
And that's going to be more or less applicable for all people.
DL I'm like well yeah it's going to be some adoptive Magnus then you're going to have some glue in
there and then do I get a bit of hamstrings or not Probably not and maybe I might see it some parts
of the movement and then there's there's some quad in there as I'm starting to stand up and it's
just messy and again it's like is that messiness that diffuse nature something you want OK or is it
something that I don't want my gut feel is that a stiff leg is almost always better and the reason
I'm going to argue that finally my.
The key point there is that I don't think that you're going to get so much more load on your RDL to
make it worth not doing a stiff leg because I mean, that's where you're going to go with it.
It's going to be like if I can do much more load on the RDL, that justifies me doing that for the
overall diffuse nature.
No, I don't think you're.
Going to get much more load either.
No I don't.
Whereas if you were to.
Argue Ragpul with me, then I would be, I would be a much, much less vociferous because with a
raypool you can go crazy.
You can put some silly weight on the bar with a raypool and then you're going to get some really
interesting diffuse stimulus.
Whereas the RDL is not so much more in terms of absolute load than the stiff leg.
I'm just thinking of what my numbers were.
I don't think I would be more than, you know, 10 kilos more on an RDL compared to a stiff leg, maybe
a little bit more, not, not so much that it would be really visible, like noticeable.
Whereas Ragpul, you just jumping up in terms of loading, you know, and so suddenly you diffuse
stimulus is just way, way higher than it would be.
So if you want to make the case ragpul versus stiff leg, I'm all ears, but I don't I don't think the
RDL is that much better.
No, I.
Agree with that.
That wasn't going to be my logic with that.
And I agree with what you said there about the stiff, about the rat pull.
My preference in any of these hinging exercises is actually a stiff leg rat pull.
And again, I use that for the purpose of this diffuse stimulus, but also getting a decent hamstring
stimulus.
But the point I was going to make is we've got multiple sets anyway.
We've got multiple sets of the stiff leg and if we're going to do these, you're laughing.
We can all hear I'm laughing, I'm laughing.
Because it's like you kind of let us stiffly rap, but it's like you want it all.
It's like I want all of the possibilities in more exercises, like not consent.
Such a good.
Exercise in my opinion.
Huge fan and I don't know why people don't do it more but my argument with this.
Yeah, would be if we're.
Going to do multiple sets as you've just pointed out there.
OK.
The RDL not reliably getting much hamstring work, Yeah, OK, maybe some depending on a person,
whatever, but it's it's not as reliable.
The stiff leg obviously is going to be more reliable.
Now if we're taking some of that hamstring work from this stiff leg and we're taking it out in the
RDL, well it's that Central Motor Command is going somewhere.
So I'm not looking at it saying, well, it's reliably A glute build out or reliably whatever.
I'm looking at saying, well want to be doing something that the stiff leg isn't necessarily doing.
And if we've got these sets to play with, we're going to get more bang for buck by adding a third
set of a stiff leg or by adding one set of an audio.
But again.
I I if if you're arguing it literally and those are my only options then I agree with you, but I
really don't think they're sure a hip trust.
Didn't exists at this point, sure, but.
Rat pools did and I think rat pool would be my preference.
I think that.
That would probably be an equipment thing because they would be having to do that off blocks.
Sure, sure.
Sure.
But yeah, no.
I that's fair.
So I would, I would.
Say, you know, today I would absolutely have the hip throws to maybe the rat pool as yeah, today it
would be quite.
Different.
Yeah, and then we're just going to go back there then.
I still think a red ball would be better than a an RDL for the purposes.
But again, I agree with you.
If your only options are either don't do the RDL or and just do stiff legs or do the RDL, then I
would say yes, you're probably right.
A little bit more variety is going to be better than you know, just continuing to do the same thing
all the time.
I agree, and again as you.
Pointed out there's not a lot of light difference.
So for me it's like, well, hang on, you can, you can.
You don't even need to try to set up.
You just do the same thing.
You pick up the bar and you just bend your knee or you don't bend your knee.
So you don't, you don't need box, you don't need a rack, you don't need anything else.
That's why I looked at and think, just why wouldn't you do that?
Why wouldn't you do?
That, yes, he could have done that on the middle 1 so that it was pairing with the deep, you know,
kind of squat, and it would have had more symmetry in the program and be more aesthetically pleasing
to look at.
Yeah, no, I get it.
I get it.
It's just, you know, I guess for people listening to this, you know, the point here is that what
we're trying to do is understand how Physiology is changing the out of the training programme or the
workout that we're doing.
You know, we're not trying to bring dogmatic programme kind of approaches to the table and argue
them.
We're literally just looking at what we think the exercise will do in terms of physiological reality
and discuss why we think one approach might be better than another.
And I think just to repeat something that I've said recently a few times on this podcast, you know,
I don't I don't have any objection to people arguing these ideas and making cases for different
things.
Sometimes people will message me on Instagram and say, you know, I think this is, you know,
potentially the case in this particular exercise.
But I've heard that you say it's not and I don't want to upset you.
And I'm like just make the case if you I get the I.
Get people asking me that about you.
Chris has said this.
It doesn't matter just if you think the Physiology, you know, argues in that direction, make the
case.
And if, if you're missing something, I'll tell you, you know, but it might not be that you're
missing something you might just be making a good case for because Physiology is messy.
There's all kinds of different options.
Hopefully this idea about diffuse stimulus today is making that point because at the moment, as we
were saying a few minutes ago, you know, a lot of people are really going to town on this idea of,
you know, localized stimulus to maximize motion occurring to specific tissues, which is absolutely
valid.
But that doesn't mean that a diffuse stimulus doesn't give you something that that that other
approach isn't doing.
You know, so it's all about making a case for what you think is, is valid.
And that's totally cool as long as you're referencing valid Physiology that exists that you're not
kind of making stuff up like metabolic stress.
I mean, that's where we go off in a different tangent and you start talking about stuff that doesn't
exist.
As long as we're rooting stuff in things like motor unit recruitment and forced velocity
relationships and fatigue mechanisms that have been shown to exist, that's cool.
And everyone can make their own cases for things that they think that's important or the other
things more important.
Fine, no problem.
Just don't make stuff up.
So that's the key thing.
Yeah, I.
Often get people asking me, you know, or you put this exercise first, but I wanted to put this
exercise first or so.
And so he said put this exercise first.
So either they'll present me with a few different options, or it would be like, you know, based on
this and this, which one's right.
And my answer is generally to them, if there's there's not a router wrong, just explain to me why
you chose that option.
And if someone can't make an explanation as to why they chose that thing, that's red flag, right?
Like for me, if I'm putting in exercise first, sometimes I put a compound first, a multi joint
first.
Sometimes I put an isolated exercise first single joint, like it doesn't, There's not a black and
white.
This is the only way I do it.
It's sometimes I'll choose to put a multi joint last, I'll put a spot last because I know that the
amount of tubal spinal CNS fatigue that's going to cause is going to mess up to the rest of that
workout, especially if I'm doing high repetitions with it.
Whereas other times I might be doing a clustered method.
I know there's not going to be a whole stack of super spinal CNS fatigue.
I want to focus on Modi unit recruitment.
I'll put that first.
It's not right or wrong, but I've got a justification as to what's happening physiologically when I
do that, as opposed to someone saying, oh, you know, I've heard one must always do this and I just
think through what's happening physiologically and that's it.
There's a difference between having a set of dogmatic rules that's like you must do this in this
way, otherwise you're not doing it properly.
It's that, well, no, the it's not about rules, it's about principles.
It's about physiological reality.
And absolutely the, the example you just gave is brilliant.
It's like, yes, sometimes I might be doing a specialisation particular muscle group, but because the
exercise that I prefer to do for that particular muscle is really demanding from a cardiovascular
point of view, I'm still not going to do it first in the workout because it's.
Going to cook.
Me for everything else that I want to do.
So it's like, yes, on the one hand, I should be prioritizing it higher up my my exercise order, but
equally, I know that I won't get anything else done if I do that first.
So it's like you've got to make a decision and say which of the variables, which of the, the
problems or circumstances are most important to you at that particular time or change things.
I mean, again, there are other options like we were arguing with the rack pool versus depthos versus
the RDL means like there are other options available to you.
And if you stand back and widen your perspective a little bit, you might see an approach that you
haven't seen before.
You might consider variables or factors that you haven't thought about before.
And it's all just about thinking things through and referencing the Physiology at each step now I
feel.
Like we could just keep talking about this made this a topic in and of itself, but we did have a
different topic we wanted to talk about.
Do you want to introduce a highly?
Related topic really, because the idea that we had for this podcast was talking about specialization
and what factors or variables we want to consider when we're talking about specialization.
So essentially, when we were discussing this, I said, well, you know, potentially we've got sort of
four major variables to think about and probably there's probably other things as well, but it's
kind of four major variables think about and they kind of separate a little bit into to two kind of
broad categories.
So on the one hand, if you're doing a specialization, you want to make progress as fast as possible.
Like, I mean, that's kind of what we want.
We want motivation.
We want, you know, kind of that that sort of see progress.
We want to be moving forwards quickly and we want to get the end of the specialization phase and
feel like we've accomplished something.
So like we don't have all the time in the world for this.
We want to dedicate a period of time to it.
So rapid progress is the name of the game.
Equally, on the other hand, you know, we also want to reach our maximum potential for that
particular muscle group.
So I think we've kind of, I've addressed this idea before, it's like the difference between rate of
growth and, and kind of like ceiling on growth.
So you've got to kind of think about these two things separately.
And these training variables are kind of fit into these these categories.
But ultimately, you know, on the one hand we want to see rapid rate of growth, but on the other hand
we want to see maximum possible growth.
Now in terms of maximum possible possible growth, as we've said before, you know we want to hit the
highest possible level of recruitment that we can and we also want to hit all the possible areas of
the muscle that we're trying to train.
So we don't just want to be training one particular area of a muscle repeatedly and expect to gain
maximum muscle mass for that area, sorry for that whole muscle group.
We want we're only going to get it for that one area.
So we want a large amount of XL variety.
We also want the maximum level of MOTI in occurring.
Now, just to kind of link that back to what we were saying, you know, a few minutes ago, that's kind
of the approach that we're seeing a lot of on social media at the moment where people are doing the
kind of 10 different exercises for a muscle group with all kind of different isometrics and, you
know, kind of partials and things like that, which is cool.
I mean, it's great to see people experimenting and playing around with the new mechanical matching
ideas and emotion recruitment and that kind of stuff.
So, you know, the idea would be if you want to specialize, you do need to have a really high level
of variety.
But by a mechanically different variety, I mean like one of my kind of examples I give when I do the
mentorship program.
And I say to people, one of my great frustrations with reading bodybuilding kind of programs is
where people will have three different biceps girls, but they're all basically the same biceps girl.
You know, they all have the exact same muscle length and joint angle, peak force and all that kind
of thing.
So it's like they're just changing between barbells and dumbbells and stuff like that.
It's like, but that's not biomechanically different exercise.
You want a fundamentally different kind of exercise if you want to have true variety in your
program.
So you know, decent amount of variety.
You've got high levels of recruitment.
Now again, the recruitment stuff is about minimizing muscle mass.
It's about, you know, picking your motivational techniques that you might have, whether it's
training with somebody else or whether it's the music you're playing, whatever it might be.
You've got all these kind of techniques that you can kind of group into that category and we can
talk about that later on.
But on the other hand, you've got stuff that's going to affect your rate of growth, which is kind of
essentially your frequency and your volume.
You're going to need to have reasonably high frequency if you want to make rapid growth and you're
going to need to have a decent chunk of volume in each of the sessions.
Now, volume doesn't have to be for every single region.
You can volumeise by like we were talking about previously in other episodes, you can volumeise by
having different, you know, kind of exercises for the same muscle group overall.
So your volume might actually just come from your large exercise variety.
But again, on the variety side, when you're looking at frequency, you wouldn't want your variety to
be spread out too much across the week.
You'd still want your variety to be kind of in your within your high frequency template.
So, you know, whether you're training every other day or whether you're training three times a week,
you'd want your variety within workout rather than across workouts.
So, you know, we're not picking a different exercise and doing, you know, ABC full body as people
keep asking me if they can do.
And that's one of the few that's one of the few things I get a bit dogmatic about.
People say, can I do full body ABC if I and then insert reasons and I'm like, not really, it's not
going to work.
So you know, kind of want I would say on a specialization to have high frequency with, with your
high recruitment and your high variety within those single workouts of your program.
And actually most of the time that's going to take care of your volume issue.
Because if you're doing a decent chunk of variety, you're probably going to find that you're doing 3
or 4 exercises for the muscle group and that's probably bringing you up against the top end of your
volume kind of workout volume if you're using those moderate loads.
So I would say that's my intro.
That would be my kind of starting point as a framework for a specialization.
What does that sound like to you?
It says.
I think that's a very helpful framework to be talking about.
There's a few points there that I think I think you're going to touch on them anyway.
But what's coming to mind for me is, and you mentioned that the start, you know, is the goal here
the speed of growth or is it the the potential or capacity of growth?
And whenever I hear people talk about these specialization type phases, what's going through my mind
is, are you just doing something which is giving you short term adaption, which you're going to lose
when you then go back to whatever you were doing beforehand?
And the sum of what you've outlined down, I know you're going to go into more detail, has the
potential to do just that, to give you a short term adoption while you're doing it.
And then you go back and you lose it.
And some of what you've outlined there has a potential to give you an adoption that's going to
persist into future phases.
And I think for people who do specialization phases, this will be an helpful thing to be aware of.
Yeah.
Absolutely.
So in terms of motor unit recruitment stuff, if we we do small muscle mass exercise designed to
target very specific regions.
And similarly, if we do exercise variety that's designed to target specific regions and we do those
for only a short period of time.
So let's say for example, you pick AI don't know, maybe you, you are doing some kind of sort of
single arm row or single arm pull down or something.
And that gives you a level of recruitment that you can't get with A2 arm version.
Then when you then go back to your subsequent kind of full body routine that doesn't have those
single arm variations, you are going to lose a little bit of the level of recruitment that you would
be able to achieve.
You'll drop down and you'll stop getting the same level of stimulus and you'll start to see atrophy
occurring quite quickly in the muscle fibers that you're not training.
The flip side to that is that by training with that higher level of recruitment, you have actually
increased your level of recruitment.
So on the one hand, you're not going to lose everything, but you are going to lose something.
You took 2 steps.
Forward and one step back, yeah.
So of course the better approach will be to try and find a way to, you know, kind of keep that level
of of level of recruitment by continuing to do that single limb variation.
But that isn't that easy.
You know, you might have to just accept that in certain situations you are going to lose a little
bit, but you've made some gains, you know, in the interim.
Now there's, there's all kinds of complicated ways you could try and avoid that that problem, but
fundamentally, most people with normal levels of motivation to find that they aren't going to want
to do single single limb, single joint exercises for every part of the body all the time.
Not saying that those people don't exist.
I'm sure they do exist.
I'm just saying that most, most people aren't going to fall into that category.
I certainly don't.
So, and the same problem you're going to get with exercise variety.
If you have some kind of very strange exercise, not strange but uncommon exercises that you
introduce into your program and then you take them out again at the end of your specialization
phase, you are then going to see loss as a result of not incorporating those things to a certain
degree.
Now again, new mechanical matching tells us that if you increase the size of a muscle or muscle
region, then it will have a bigger leverage and then can contribute more to other stuff.
So if you, for example, were to do a glute specialization phase, you would find that your glute then
did get involved in other stuff, not the stuff that doesn't use the glute, but it will get involved
in other lower body exercises to agree to extent.
So if you were to do a lot of hip through a single leg glute bridge, that kind of stuff, and then
you were to go and start reducing the amount of direct loop work that you did, you would find that
your loot still did more in your RDLS, in your squats, in your leg presses and other kind of things
as well, simply because it now has better leverage than it did before.
So you get the same carryover that you would get or do get from the recruitment improvements that
you've made.
You get those carrying over again into your subsequent training blocks new mechanical matching wise
as well in that.
Example.
So I like that example because I look at that, say I've got a guy who can't build their chest and it
is like no matter what I do a bench all the time, can't build it totally flat.
What I would do in that situation is take out any kind of benching and I'll do something like a peg
deck and then I would achieve some peg growth and then I would potentially go back to benching.
And like you said, the leverage will shift.
It depends.
How extreme that leverages are, yeah.
Yes, yeah.
And and you might modify the bench, you know, the technique a little bit to try to make a little bit
more chest dominant, whatever.
But say you got someone who they weren't limited in the development of that muscle, they just were
choosing to do a specialization phase anyway.
Maybe they're actually somewhat chest dominant anyway in their benching and pressing movements.
Then is the change in leverage going to achieve anything really that meaningful after that
specialization phase?
Interesting.
Question.
I mean, if the chest is already the limiting factor, then I don't think you would get a qualitative
difference.
I think it would fundamentally still be, I mean you still would still be training the the chest to
pretty much the maximum extent that you can.
I don't think it would change things fundamentally.
I know it sounds.
Like splitting hairs.
But why I say that?
It's because if you were quite developed in a particular muscle, then having that exercise variation
for a short period of time might not really be doing much of anything for you.
Yeah, I.
Mean the distant again comes back to this idea of are we talking about an exercise in which the
prime mover, mover, the limiting factor is variable or not?
And the bench press is a great example of one that fundamentally is extremely variable.
You can move around the relative activations of the three major muscle groups.
So if somebody is very triceps dominant in the bench, then you can shift them possibly with some
exercise variation as you were saying, wider grips and that kind of thing and some chest focused
work.
You could shift them to being chest dominant in a particular bench pressing variation as a result of
a specialization phase.
And that would then change what the bench press did for them really, which is interesting because
you've just changed how they're then going to respond to training.
Whereas I think with other exercises, I mean the hip thrust is the best example really, There is no
scenario in which you're going to convert a hip thrust into a.
But don't want to exercise.
It's not going to happen.
It's just not.
Yeah.
And that's.
Why, you know when sometimes people will be like, oh, I can't grab my glutes and I've got poor mind
muscle connection.
I don't feel my glutes in the hips rush, but I fill them in.
Whatever.
Should I do that instead?
And in my head I'm like, well, no, because nothing else is moving that hip thrust load for you, even
if you don't feel it.
But conversely, you could have someone in a bench where they're like, I don't ever feel my chest.
Should I do something else?
Yeah, probably like that.
That's actually an option or an exercise where there might not be a lot of chest stimulus for you.
Yeah.
I mean, I think this this comes back to them just is there any other data that you can gather that
will help you assess what your kind of limiting factor is in exercises like the bench press?
You know, and you might want to just look at your numbers for different exercises.
I mean, I always say to people, you know, if if you've got an absolutely monstrous dip strength and
compared to your bench press, you'll probably try such dominant if you're overhead pressed, it's the
same as your.
Bench there.
Yeah.
If you're overhead press is getting similar numbers to your bench press, then again you've probably
dealt dominant in your bench press.
You know, whereas if you've got an amazing bench press but your overhead press and your dip are
relatively weak by comparison, you're probably just dominant.
So it's just like, can you gather some data that help you kind of benchmark where you are in terms
of relative leverages and that will then tell you probably what X was doing.
Another thing you can do is test your bench press variations.
So like if I do a relatively close grip bench press, you know, straight away I can, you know, so I
get a certain number and then I try and move out into a wide grip bench press and my number
absolutely tanks.
And it's because I'm seeing the loss of triceps involvement.
So I'm a very, very triceps dominant presser.
So as soon as I take my triceps out of the equation to a certain degree and limit their capacity for
contribution, my bench press just absolutely drops out the sky and just disappears to nothing.
So again, you can kind of play around with these kind of tests and see what you think is likely to
be the limiting factor.
Not saying that these are hard and fast rules that are going to give you perfect answers every time.
It's just indicative.
In addition to this idea of, oh, I'm not feeling this muscle.
Yeah, But you know, what do the numbers tell you about what you're capable of doing in these
different XL variations?
Do the numbers tell you the same story if you're not feeling the muscle and also the numbers tell
you the same story.
Fantastic.
But if the numbers tell you a completely different story from what you're feeling, it might just be
that your brain isn't feeling it for some other reason.
So that basically kind of, we kind of digressed a little bit and we started talking about what
happens after a specialization phase rather than what's happening inside the specialization phase.
And then that kind of spiraled into exercise selection.
But you know, when I start the original framework, I suggested that we've got kind of the
recruitment side of things and we've got plus the variety side of things, which kind of more or less
direct you to where you're going to get to eventually, as you pointed out correctly, assuming you
carry on doing those things.
And then the alternative sort of side of things is then the volume and the frequency, which kind of
determines the rate that you're progressing at.
So in a specialization phase, you would never really want to kind of do what a lot of people do.
And you know, I'm going to get all kinds of messages after I say this, but I'm going to say it
anyway.
A specialization phase does not mean doing one extra day per week while you focus on the muscle that
you're interested in training.
That's not a specialization phase.
I mean, so many people come to me and they go, I'm doing this three, this full body workout program
in three days a week and then I'm going to do an extra day where I do, I might do that is not how
are you going to make progress on a specialisation phase?
That is not going to work.
OK, This is not going to do nothing.
I mean, let's just kind of be specific here.
I mean, so many people kind of want to, as you pointed out earlier, make things black and white.
It's like it works or it doesn't work or it works perfectly or it doesn't work at all.
No, no, no, that is just not going to be the best approach.
Specialisation is where you, you know, you as the silver era and this is another great example of
silver era bodybuilder is getting there.
First, you integrate the specialization into your existing program.
So it's like you you you include it in what you're already doing.
You replace what you're previously doing for those muscle groups with these new exercises that are
designed to give you a greater overall stimulus now not just the creator of osimus in terms of the
rate of growth for the specific muscles, but also the areas and the level of accruing that you're
achieving.
So this is where you kind of come back to this idea of exercise order.
We talked about this already doing things first, you know, and trying to kind of sort of maximize
the recruitment with other techniques and maximize the variety to get everything you want to do.
But then the frequency and the volume are then overlaid on top of that.
So we're doing stuff as frequently as possible.
So either every other day or we're doing it three times a week.
And then again, volume wise, we're going to try and push up against our limits a little bit to try
and make sure we're getting the maximum possible stimulus.
Now, I don't think unless people have got very high work capacities or are extremely patient and
have nothing else to do all day that they're going to probably really hit their top levels of
volume.
I think that, you know, if we're working with heavier loads or isometrics or things like that,
you're probably going to run out of energy before you run out of recovery capacity really.
But with moderate or moderately heavy loads, yeah, you're probably limited to three or four sets per
muscle repo session.
So that's kind of the the sort of the context that we tend to see the data.
Can you expand?
On that same that you made a moment ago did literally just send me said unless someone had all the
time in the world that they're probably not going to hit up against their most if you look at.
The data we've got for recovery, we've got really good data.
As I say to people all the time, we've got data for certain things and we've got less data for other
things.
So we've got really good data for how long it takes to recover for different numbers of sets of
moderately heavy loads or moderate ish loads to failure with conventional kind of squat like breast,
bench press, that kind of thing.
So mainly stretch positioning.
So you can kind of draw a line through those, those number of sets per workout, per muscle group and
you kind of get three sets as a recoverable within 48 hours, five sets over within 72 hours and
blah, blah, blah, blah, blah.
And you get a nice straight line running through those sets right the way up to about 10 or 12 sets,
taking about, you know, 6-7 days to recover from.
We don't have the same collection of data that you can draw a line through for heavier loads.
The straightaway.
If I were to say I'm just going to use five Rep maxes, I don't have data that will tell me how long
it takes to recover.
But we know that if you use heavier, I mean, I've got a table that I didn't sort of put out as an
infographic ages ago and everyone went absolutely crazy about it because it showed that you could do
20 and pretty much recover the following day.
I mean, and that's, that's an extreme example.
Ultimately, Ivory Maxes, you do kind of see much, much higher volumes being recoverable from within
48 hours.
It's not going to be three sets, it's going to be 5 plus.
So, okay.
Yeah.
So you're saying if one wanted to maximize the within session stimulus then potentially way to do
that would be doing sub five repetition sets and then you could potentially do?
Four, yeah.
And that's even before you start leaving a Rep in reserve, which is going to help.
And then maybe again, you've got people doing isometrics, which is even less problematic than a
heavy load.
So, you know, when you start scaling this stuff and that's why we're starting to see people on
social media doing like 30 sets per session of isometrics.
It's like, well, because you can, you know, have I got the patience for that?
No.
But I'm not in the business of trying to compete on that thing.
So, you know, this is the point.
I think most people would run out of patience and motivation and energy before they ran out of
recovery capacity if they started to move in that direction of using heavier loads.
And it would have.
To look very specific, which is, but it would have.
To look different from.
They would look different.
From what we're seeing, most people with most, most kind of training programs, which to be fair,
silver era stuff, most of the time they're using moderately heavy loads by which I define 6 to 10.
You know, that's kind of the zone that most of them are working.
And if they go higher than that, it's an equipment issue most of the time or whatever, it's a
practical concern.
But where possible, they're kind of training in that kind of moderately heavy zone.
And, and that's kind of where, you know, I train, that's where I see a lot of people training day.
But of course, because the Physiology is allowing people to take advantage of this greater recovery
capacity with heavier loads or isometrics, people are moving in that direction, which is, which is
really interesting because again, like I've said multiple times on this podcast and before, you're
using the Physiology to open doors to new training opportunities.
Fantastic.
I think that's really interesting.
I mean, we talked about the Alan Stephen plan a few a few weeks ago and I think he was doing 25
repetitions and that was with A5 Rep Max I believe.
And he was doing that essentially like a cluster method type thing.
So you know, it was basically you would take shorter risk periods and you would do kind of, it was
sort of up to the individual how many repetitions that would do and they just had to hit the target
of 20 fives.
Now, obviously if you're doing moderate loads to get 25 maximally stimulating repetitions, you know,
we're talking at least five sets.
That's assuming there's not even any fatigue that's occurred realistically.
But he was 6 plus sets which just wouldn't be be recoverable yet he was doing these, 25 wouldn't be.
Recoverable if we reference the moderate load data set that we've got from the current literature.
But yeah, he's using heavier loads and so he's not running into that issue.
I don't think that most of the time if people are programming in a way to limit fatigue, then they
won't probably hit their upper session limit in terms of recoverability before they hit their energy
limit in terms of just getting everything done.
Unless they're literally just going to be sitting there in the gym all day.
Or they've got their own gym.
And they can just kind of do a Doug Hepburn and wander over and do an exercise and then wander back
and have a drink of milk or whatever.
And then whatever he was doing, I don't know, orange juice and then wander back And do you know,
sort of another set of something else?
I mean, like, sure, if you your whole day is just like playing around in your gym, then potentially
that's doable.
But most people are going to want to go to the gym, spend an hour doing what they want to do and
then go and do the rest of their life.
And I think that's kind of where the moderate load or moderately heavy load kind of sort of silver
era bodybuilding programme really comes into its own and where the kind of the other sort of stuff
which is totally valid starts to become a little bit harder to maximize.
Yeah.
And that didn't phrase that properly.
What I mean is, yeah, OK, hang on.
So I'm not implying that you can't.
Yeah, I'm not implying stimulus maximization.
I'm talking about recovery capacity maximization.
So it's almost an irrelevance really.
What I'm saying is that it's quite easy to bump up against your top end of your recovery capacity
doing moderate loads to failure.
You're going to hit that with three sets.
You probably aren't going to hit your recovery capacity to failure, sorry.
You are going to hit your top end of your recovery capacity training with heavy loads either to
failure or with one reserve or with isometrics.
It's just you just don't have time in the day or the energy to get through a whole workout where
you're doing that for all your muscle groups.
I don't think.
Is this just a technicality?
I mean, does it really mean anything?
Well, I'm just pointing out that depending on how you structure the program, what approach you take,
workout volume may be something that you can't really push very far, or it may be something you can
actually push quite a long way.
You've made distinction.
There between this between stimulus and short capable volume and I wasn't going to push you in that
earlier because I know it could be a bit of a rabbit hole but you made that decision yourself.
So do you want to tell us why you made that distinction?
Yeah, so.
Ultimately, I think that with moderate loads to failure training full body three times a week or
every other day, you're going to Max out your recovery capacity before you Max out your stimulus.
So workout stimulus probably maximizes around, I mean this is very roughly somewhere between 6:00
and 10:00 sets per workout.
Do you think that's all the?
Case if you were to be training with these heavier loads, low Rep sets.
I think I do, because I think that a big chunk of that plateau is the not the fatigue causing that
issue.
I think it's literally a stimulus saturation because it's a really, really flat plateau at that
point.
So ultimately I think that we probably don't reach that stimulus plateau when we're training with
three sets to failure with moderate loads as we see in the data sets that we've got.
So ultimately you're hitting a recovery maximum rather than a stimulus maximum.
If you were training with heavy loads, we've seen, you know, you can do a whole bunch of fiber
maxes, start leaving a Rep and reserve here or there or start throwing some ice metrics in and
you're probably going to hit, you know, 678 sets worth of stimulus before you hit your recovery
capacity limit.
And so ultimately you've kind of maxed out your stimulus really by doing that rather than maxing out
your your recovery capacities.
But again, that's between session recovery that I'm describing.
That's interesting.
In that scenario, right, you've actually got junk volume you could end.
Up with some junk volume, Yes, absolutely.
Because you kind of go off the top end of your yeah, but you're still recovering.
But you've got some junk volume.
You're still recovering.
But you've got junk volume.
I've never thought about it in that end of the extreme right.
But if you then start say, well, can I do that for every single muscle group?
Well, some superhumans might be able to, yeah.
But I, I mean, that's a long way away of what I can do.
You you you're going to find that that's just insane amount of exercises and sets and reps that
you're going to need to get done is going to push you to sort of three hour style workouts, which,
you know, we've seen examples of in the silver era, you know, And so like, if you're doing literally
nothing else and you lock your phone in a safe and don't look at it to take the social media kind of
thing out of your head, then you might be able to get to a point where you can start to construct a
life around the gym.
You know, I'm just kind of pushing the boundaries of the thought experiment here, but I think, you
know, the problem you're going to face is the within session fatigue, not the between session
fatigue.
I see this is beyond the time.
I mean, I guess the part and parcel aren't there, but if you look at some of the like the class
method we talked about last week, I think it's feasible you could use a method like that and
actually get say, you know, 25 maximally simulating repetitions muscle.
And sure, that might still be in a 90 minute session, but I think you could probably do it sub two
hours.
If you were being quite specific about, you know, using A5 Rep Max load 30 seconds between
repetitions or however you want to do it.
I think there's there's ways you could potentially make that a little bit more time efficient.
Yeah, I.
Mean, I think, I think we're starting to describe, you know, extremely rarefied, you know, scenarios
here which are kind of not really applicable to the vast majority of people most of the time.
But, you know, it's just, it's just interesting to just follow the Physiology and see where it leads
you.
And as I say, I think there are people who are travelling this route already.
And I've seen, you know, kind of signs of this on, on on social media where people are kind of
saying, well, you know, if I can do, you know, all these isometrics or all these heavy load sets,
maybe Concentrigoni sets and not create, you know, post workout fatigue, then I can just do all of
this work.
And it's like, yeah, but the work starts to add up.
And then you get to these two 3-4 hour workouts and it's like, well, at what point in that two or
three 4 hour period did you cease to actually get high levels of recruitment because she just
cooked.
And again, that then comes back to this to have an idea of splitting stuff up a lot more and taking
a lot more time between sets and between exercises.
And you know, maybe you start separating your workouts into three separate daily chunks and you're
doing different body parts and different, well, I mean.
That's a good point because we've given some examples of where people split into two.
I think maybe we Clancy, Ross one, maybe we split into AM and PM and Reg did that as well.
But there are actually some silly real lifters who at least for periods of time that would actually
do a third workout per day as well.
And like you said, that might actually be if you lived in the gym, if you had the time, that might
be a more intelligent way of doing it.
Yeah.
And again, you know, you've got to look at, you know what you're doing during that day and you want
to make sure that you least damaging stuff earlier in the day because you wouldn't want any kind of
inflammatory response to kick off even if it was a small one.
I mean, if you're training in these ways to minimize post workout fatigue, you're not expecting to
create meaningful amounts of muscle damage, but you might get a little bit say 6 to 8 hours post
workout because the less damage you create, the earlier it kicks in.
You kind of like you're going to watch the time scales of these things.
But yeah, you could kind of pick, you divide your entire full body workout into 3 chunks and you
could say we'll do the least damaging stuff 1st and then the next second and then most damaging
stuff last before you sleep.
And then you should find that by the time you get back to your gym, the following, I know you'd have
the following day off when you could be full body.
So you'd have the yeah, you'd have the whole following day to to dissipate all of that and then you
start again the day afterwards.
So, you know, I think that there's ways around that.
But again, you know, we're describing extremely unusual, you know, kind of training program here.
I'm just pointing out that, you know, this Physiology based approach to strength training is about
trying to understand what's happening.
You know, it's not about because ultimately this is the difference between and I don't know if many
people realize that they're doing this, but when, when the current, so the current trend is for
people to call themselves science based lifters.
Now, interestingly, that's changed because only a year or two ago people were calling themselves
evidence based lifters.
And that has changed.
There's been like a shift in terminology and I don't know how many people who are using these
terminologies realize how different those two things are.
Yes.
Now I've had a, I've talked about this before, I've explained this before, but I'm just going to say
it again.
Evidence based approaches are what you do if you can't do science.
OK, so evidence based means basically you run a study to see what happened when you do something and
you get the answer out and it's an outcome, it's an objective outcome.
So you say, what is the evidence that X technique does?
I result and you have a bunch of people and you give them X technique and you get Y result.
Well, you don't get Y result.
That's evidence.
Yeah, science is going what does X technique actually that's.
Really interesting.
Essentially, I mean, evidence and outcome are almost synonymous, yes?
Saying you should call yourself an outcome baselifter.
Well, that's what.
The then because it's confusing because.
Then we're talking about outcome.
Yeah, yeah, sure, sure, sure.
Sure, sure.
But yeah, so long term outcomes of a particular trial are your evidence.
So if you look in the evidence based medicine kind of segment or you look in the evidence based
physiotherapy or evidence based strength training or evidence based, whatever you want to look at
it, what all of it is doing is saying we don't know what's happening.
That's what evidence based kind of sort of program frameworks, sorry, evidence based frameworks say
as an assumption.
I mean, they don't say it because it would be embarrassing, but they they kind of assume that they
don't know what's happening.
They go, we don't what's happening.
So we're just going to test whether this thing has this outcome.
And if it does, then we're like, Oh yeah, there's evidence that this thing does this thing, so this
training technique does that thing or this training technique is better than that.
So when people are talking about, for example, there was that whole period of time a while back
where people were talking about range of motion and strength training or, you know, kind of muscle
length and strength training.
They're all the evidence states that longer muscle lengths are, you know, kind of give more
hypertrophy than shorter muscle lengths during strength training exercises.
They're literally just collecting a number of studies and going, we've got three or four or five,
six studies showing that longer muscle lengths are better than shorter muscle lengths producing
hypertrophy.
And we're just looking at how it comes.
And that's evidence based framework.
Look for you science based says how is this thing working, what is happening?
Science based is going well.
We think that Titan is producing passive tension that's produced and you basically try and figure
out what's happening and then you apply that to your situation to understand whether or not your
outcome is going to be better or worse.
And what we've seen over the last two or three years, and I've been kind of really hammering this
day in, day out, is that the scientific approach is absolutely, you know, kind of smashing the socks
off evidence based approaches for strength training at the moment, you know, science based
approaches are predicting what's going to happen and they're getting you the best answer and they're
fitting with the silver era bodybuilding training programs and everything is like, you know, fitting
together relatively nicely.
And as a result, I think we're starting to see people talking about, but they may not necessarily
know that science is different from evidence.
You know, they may not know know that a science based framework is a completely different animal
from an evidence based framework, but it is.
And it's really interesting to see people calling themselves science based lifters and actually
using Physiology to understand what is happening and then predict the outcomes of a training program
based on that understanding.
Because that's what science is.
It's an understanding of how the world works.
Evidence is not.
It's literally just saying, well, we've noticed that this thing does this thing, you know, it's
like, well, you know, we think that that does that thing because we've seen it happen, but you don't
actually know how it happens.
So you could be looking at something completely irrelevant.
You know my.
Observation is that people who are using this term science based lifting, I think they largely do
understand this distinction because what I am seeing is actually a lot of people who are claiming
science based lifting status almost depicting themselves as against or oppositional to evidence
based.
That's pretty.
Cool.
That's interesting.
Yeah.
And.
Maybe this is a bit more of a TikTok phenomenon, like it's something I've seen a lot there and maybe
a little bit less on Instagram.
But I think people are aware that there is a distinction.
And I mean, you did a podcast on this, what, at least a year ago, whenever it was.
And that was probably the first time for me I become aware that, oh, there is these this distinction
that people started to talk about.
You know, I hadn't, like you said, people weren't calling themselves science based lift lifters at
that point or in a man.
I don't know when it started for me.
I feel like it probably started when you and Paul did that podcast.
But I don't know if if maybe that was just I was living in a cave.
Maybe I hadn't noticed it, but certainly has has become much more popular over the last year.
So no, that's interesting.
I don't know.
I mean, there's just, it is definitely a thing at the moment, definitely seeing an enormous push in
that direction of terminology.
But again, not everybody may realize that there is a difference there and not everybody may realize
that the mainstream academia of strength training is still in the evidence based framework.
For now, I mean.
That's why I think there's a lot of conflict.
I think that a lot of the people who have traditionally been evidence based, I think maybe that's
why there's a lot of pushback against new science space lifters because they are realizing that
there's there's a disconnect between those two things.
I mean that.
That's why you know when people make fun of some of the figureheads of the evidence based strength
training community and they make fun of them for saying you don't know why you know, kind of long
muscle aches cause more hypertrophy than short muscle aches.
We don't know.
We don't know.
They keep saying we don't know.
It's like what science based lifters may not realize yet is that we don't know as stated by an
evidence based practitioner is the foundation of their faith.
It's the foundation of their starting point is the foundation of their framework.
They have to start with that because otherwise they can't implement evidence based approaches
because they would have, you would always just do science instead, because science is better.
You would never do evidence based if you could do science because science is always going to give
you the better answer.
And you would never do science if you can do engineering, because engineering is going to give you a
better answer than sciences because engineering has all the science baked into it already.
So ultimately, when people are, you know, kind of seeing these fig heads saying, Oh, we don't know
why, we don't know why, you know, or, you know, it's it's like they have to say that.
They have to say that because otherwise you would default back to science and you go, we actually,
we do know, you know, and that's what a lot of the influencers are now starting to do.
They're saying when they're hearing people say, we don't know how stretch media hypertrophy works
like we do actually, it's just tight.
And that that then what you've got is 2 groups of people talking past each other because the
evidence based people can't hear that information.
And that's really interesting, OK, because they actually can't hear it.
You can say it to them and they'll just literally I'll just go straight over them because if they
heard it then they would realize that what they're doing isn't applicable anymore.
Because if you have a science based explanation for something, then you don't need evidence because
science gives you the answer.
Evidence is a second kind of option for you if you can't do science.
I think if people could just understand that, then I think we would see it even more of a conflict
happening to you.
I mean, ultimately I'm I'm chill about it because it doesn't affect me.
But I think there will be potentially a shift as the next generation of excise scientists go into
the academic community and they're expecting to do science and the existing communities trying to
get them to do evidence based approaches.
And there'll be a conflict there as the younger people coming through start to go, well, no, we want
to do science.
We want to understand how Titan is affecting stretch media virtually.
We don't want to just keep doing random studies yet again, testing whether or not long muscle aches
cause more muscle growth and short muscle aches and then adding them to the list of studies you've
already gotten and doing a metro analysis because that's what's happening.
You're just doing study after study after study and then they do a metro analysis and that's
evidence based.
That's all just evidence based tactics, whereas science is trying to figure out what actually
happened, you know, and that's again why you've got these disagreements between people who go, oh,
I've got 13 metro analysis that show that, you know, 2 * a week is the same as three times a week.
And I'm like, dude, Physiology tells me that can't possibly be true.
So I don't care how many metro analysis you've got because I'm not doing evidence based practice.
I'm not trying to construct a whole, you know, kind of list of studies and then arguing about I've
got the most studies with the best statistical significance and the most metro analysis and I don't
care, you know, because I'm not doing that.
That's not the game I'm playing.
And gradually what we're going to see, I think is as the younger people come through into the
academic academic community and they want to do science instead of doing evidence based approaches
that we'll see that starting to be, there'll be a conflict.
And then, as you know, there'll be a resolution and they'll find a sort of some kind of approach to,
to to go forward and hopefully they'll learn more on the science side.
But, you know, I find human dynamics fascinating, as, you know, I mean, it's just really, really
interesting to watch.
Yeah, definitely.
I mean.
Is tea talk is kind of like the wild, Wild West, but it's really interesting seeing that shift
amongst younger lifters and the the way that have embraced science and seeing that power dynamic
shift from, you know, what used to be seen as a previous authority, which was evidence based.
And like you said, when that give it a few years, when those people start to enter the, the actual,
you know, academia and research labs, it's going to be an interesting thing to observe for sure.
Yeah.
And you know, ultimately science is a better tool for establishing the answer to these questions.
You know, it will always be more attractive to people.
Now, I think the confusion arises is where influencers try to confound the two and they try and use
evidence based terminology when they're talking about science and vice versa.
So, you know, there's a bunch of influencers who they'll present themselves as science based, but
then they'll start using evidence based tactics and they'll say, well, you know, all of these
experts agree on this matter or all of these studies say this thing or this matter analysis says
that thing.
All evidence based tactics, it's all evidence based framework.
It's all evidence based approach.
Science doesn't care whether you've got 1000 experts who all say the same thing.
Science doesn't care whether you've got 100 metro analysis that all say the same thing doesn't care.
All that science does is describe what is actually happening.
And if you've got an understanding of what's actually happening and your metro analysis say
something different and there's something wrong with your metro analysis.
And if you've got 1000 experts all say the same thing and one expert says something different, but
the expert that says something different actually understands what they're talking about, then your
other thousand experts are wrong.
It is literally doesn't matter.
It's like it either is or it isn't.
You know, we've got a lot of evidence based stuff being used as if it were science.
And I think this could be interesting to watch whether people can see that over time as they start
to notice that a lot of their science, a lot of the older, more established.
And I don't think this is true about the younger generation at all.
As you say.
I think the the Wild West of TikTok is definitely literally just arguing ideas, which is fantastic.
You know, it's like, is this true or is it not true?
Whereas a thing where you find with the older generation, the more established people, they're kind
of they're the ones that tend to go, oh, I've got 13 meta analysis that show this thing and I'm
like, I don't care, tell me how it works because you can't because you don't know because you're not
doing science.
She's doing evidence based approaches now.
Whereas you've got another person who's like this is how it works and the Physiology works like this
and this is happening and then this is happening and it's like, yeah, that's exactly what's
happening clearly because that's just Physiology.
And I think that's the really interesting kind of dynamic that we're starting to see.
And that's ultimately the cause of the drama that I was part of last year, which everybody knows
about, which ultimately came about because you've got evidence based people saying, you know, all
the metro analysis show that this is the case.
And then the science approach says, well, that can't possibly be true.
So what's what's the problem with those metro analysis?
It is interesting.
Because someone who is evidence based isn't going to accept the scientific explanation.
Because that's not evidence necessarily.
Because you would destroy.
The framework that they're living in, well, that too.
Yeah, literally.
You end up like you said, you end up speaking past each other because you're not speaking the same
language, because what's actually meaningful to one person is meaningless to the other person.
Correct.
The evidence based framework assumes that science can't give an answer.
It has to, otherwise you wouldn't use it.
That I mean that's ultimately what it was designed to do is designed to step in and solve a problem
where it goes back to evidence based as soon as the beginning.
Because at that time and probably arguably I'm not comment on it, but potentially arguably today we
don't have the Star Trek level technology to be able to do science at the level that we would need
to do to understand how every single medical procedure and medical treatment is working at the time.
And whether that's true today is a separate question.
You know, so evidence based medicine came about because it was like, OK, well what can we do
instead?
Well, we just test stuff and see what happens.
And then we accumulate evidence for and against a particular treatment.
And then you incorporate that into other areas.
But you don't need to do that in strength training because science is already doing the answer for
you.
I mean, that's really.
Good point.
It's not.
I don't know if you're saying this, what I'm hearing is not necessarily that evidence based is, you
know, quote UN quote add or wrong or anything like that, but it is a second option when we it's a
horse and.
Cart in the age of the automobile.
It's just simply outdated and unnecessary.
You don't need it if you can do science, if you can do.
Science and because for me personally, like, you know, if I look at say, you just talked about
medicine, if I look at, say, some of their, their stuff on say supplementation or functional health,
and some, there's some huge holes in some of that literature.
And to this extent that I think we probably probably can't actually understand some of that stuff
the way we would want to.
And we do, I would say, have to rely on evidence based outcomes in some of that stuff.
And so I actually personally use that language for myself.
I'll use language for being science based or evidence based, depending on what the topic is that I'm
talking about.
So in my mind I'm making the decision and I'm actually acknowledging at points in time I'm being
evidence based here because I either I don't know the science or I don't think we actually have
access to that totally and there.
Might be terrains that you can't use a vehicle on and you have to use a horse.
I mean it's like that that's just how it is.
It's like you can't go there in a car there's no Rd. you know, so you you're on horseback and that's
that's exactly the same situation that we've got here.
It's like you can navigate this terrain using evidence based framework because that's the only one
that's going to work You have to you can navigate you, but you can navigate this one using science
based framework.
So let's use that.
And I think ultimately that's kind of the the way I would urge people to consider it.
Now, you know, I'm interested to see where this goes, whether people pick me up on this or whether
they just ignore it or whether they argue about it.
It'd be really interesting to know.
But that's the way that I think it works.
So it'd be interesting to see what what other people.
Yeah.
Interesting.
To see what the reactor videos are that we've seen in the coming week or more likely 10,000 word
articles to go back to specialization phases.
Yes.
What have we not covered so far?
I think.
We're there actually, I think we got that.
It's actually not hugely complicated.
We just break it down into component variables.
We've just got the variables that affect the way you're going to get to the maximum level of kind of
fossil mass that you can obtain.
It's just going to be add to recruitment and the neuro mechanical matching side of things, the
variety.
And then on the rate of growth, you've just got the frequency and the volume now frequency we're
kind of baking that in as being three times a week or every other day.
And the volume and then was the longer version that we had about whether you can actually maximize
workout volume or not and depending on how you might approach it and all the various kind of
insurance and outs of that particular question.
So, but yeah, that's that's how I would visualize it.
Now, I'm not sure that that then lends itself to a lot of different approaches.
They're all going to have the same kind of characteristics.
They're all going to be training, you know, a high work size variety with a high degree of agreement
multiple times per week.
Beyond that, I think there's probably a number of ways of baking the cake, would you say?
Depending on someone's experience level, maybe.
So if I'm looking at a beginner, well, a beginner shouldn't be special, shouldn't I would say I'm
not going to set a specialization phase for a beginner, but say you've got someone who is a little
bit early on in their lifting journey, then perhaps a goal of a specialization phase for them will
be predominantly increasing the speed or the rate of muscle growth in that muscle, right.
So in that instance, arguably the volume frequency where you place that, that excise and that work
out is going to be more important than necessarily high excise variety or some of those variables
that are going to be more important for total muscle mass development, right.
So what do you think for somebody who's maybe more intermediate compared to advanced, maybe the
specialization phase might look a little bit different, I don't know.
I think you could take an advanced specialization phase and it would work for anybody.
I mean, because ultimately you're dealing with the most limitations in that scenario.
So you have to overcome all the hurdles.
You have to fix everything and make it work for everybody.
So I think you can you can say that about.
Anything advanced really, if it's done.
Correctly.
Now, generally speaking, the industry historically has thrown all kinds of rubbish at advanced
people that doesn't work at all.
But yeah, the way we think about advanced people, yes, the advanced program has to be perfect
because otherwise you're not going to make any progress.
And so it will work for the same person at a lower level of advancement.
Yeah.
So you can kind of get away with more mistakes if you like or compromises at the intermediate level,
but you know, ultimately the same principles are still going to apply.
And my argument.
There and maybe this comes down to how long someone's choosing to specialize for so in my head I'm
thinking you know 8 weeks among those lines that's what I would sort of regard as maybe a somewhat
standard creation for a specialization phase but I understand maybe some people do much longer
whatever I don't think there's a lot of value in doing a whole lot less than that how long would you
normally prescribe A specialization phase for well I'm.
Not a huge fan of them, to be honest.
And I think it depends on the individual and their circumstances.
I think I look at specialization phases where, you know, people clearly have a problem they're
trying to solve.
So I don't like specialization phases where people just go, oh, I'm going to do a specialization
phase because I feel like it.
So well, really, you know, why?
Just carry on doing what you're doing.
It's working and you're going to make gradual programs across the board and everything.
You're not rocking the boat, you're not messing things up.
Whereas, you know, if somebody is like, you know, here I am, clearly I've got a serious, you know,
kind of lack of this particular development and like, like, yes, I agree with you.
And it's like, OK, how do we fix that then?
And then actually you've got to kind of start with because the chances are that that person has got
a deficit in that particular area for a specific reason.
And the reason, if they are training with a degree of rigor and intelligence, the reason will be
because they have no leverage.
Yes.
So you actually then have to look at your exercise selection.
You have to figure and do the things that we've talked about.
You have to get your exercise variety on point.
You have to get emotion recruitment high for the specific areas that you're trying to train.
And then you have to train that rigorously multiple times per week for a period of time.
And you'll notice what's happening.
And when it stops, when it gets to you, to the way you want to go, you stop.
How long is a piece of string?
Well, that's where you're going, isn't it?
Yeah, I mean, that's an if.
You've seen so scenario context where one might use specialization phase and it's probably not.
I think a lot of people think that that's them, but I don't think it truly is a lot of the time.
Like generally what people I think are doing, they're thinking I have an ideal physique in mind and
it looks like X.
And so that that physique in mind has, you know, overdeveloped or largely developed biceps or chest,
whatever.
And so that's going to want to specialize.
That's fine though.
That's.
They've established that, but that's the same as what I'm saying.
Well, it's a little bit different in the sense of what you're saying then is like the exercise
variety is going to help in terms of changing leverages.
And I get that it will still potentially do that for this this individual.
But what I would argue in that case is if you've got a physique goal, then potentially does not make
sense just to in your normal day-to-day training ongoing decide this is these are the muscles that
are more important to me.
These are the muscles that are less important to me, but that's just changing.
Your normal routine into a specialization routine, sure, but that's just.
Yeah, it just carries on until you get to where you're going, isn't it?
I mean, you're saying the same thing as me.
You're just changing the word.
Yeah, I guess so.
I.
Would say, I kind of look at it as like high priority muscles and low priority muscles, right?
It's most people are.
Going to have probably maybe 3 high priority muscles, potentially more and then there'll be a couple
of low priority.
I'd say there's normally going to be like one or two very low priority where someone doesn't really
care that trainer directly well because.
This is useful because you're extending the, you're extending the applicability of what we're
saying, yes, because then.
It's not just a six week or eight week phase.
This is kind of how you build out a program to see how you would.
Build a program if you were trying to push your physique in a particular direction, yeah, push
should be.
So it's actually not just about specialization, it's about it's about structuring your program
towards a specific goal.
Yeah, so.
I do still use specialization phases and the way.
Obviously, there's some scenarios like you've mentioned where they're going to be applicable, but I
use them for general purposes and I use them more as an opportunity to increase mode image
recruitment in a given muscle.
And then I'll rotate that.
So I'll have it as part of a essentially like a balance program.
So it might be OK, this is a program where I want overall development, fairly balanced development,
male physique focus, whatever.
And then I might have a period where because like you've outlined before, we can't feasibly
necessarily have unilateral work for every single muscle and clusters for every single muscle and
whatever.
So I'll include some of those exercises, some of those more motor unit enhancement, recruitment sort
of exercises, methods for say one or two muscles at a time.
And then I'll rotate that to something else.
So the way I'm doing it generally is not yes, there'll be some extra exercise variation to do that.
But I'm looking at more chasing a different adaption in that muscle rather than necessarily speeding
up the the rate of growth or anything else.
Does that make sense?
So anything else when you come up for like, like we've gone down a lot of different paths today.
So hopefully there's been something there for everyone.
But I think you made a good point to to conclude at the end there that while we we fail this in the
language of specialization phase, this is ultimately the same framework you're going to use for any
high priority muscle, which you could include in in your training ongoing.
So if nothing else, I think that's a valuable way for someone to think about this if they are
writing programs.
So thank you guys for joining us.
As always, we appreciate all of you.
Please like and share, yeah, and comment and everything else.
And we do hope you'll join us next week.