Episode: 023 Fatigue accumulation and what to do about it.
URL: https://open.spotify.com/episode/7ErUaojT36aUiHnc09Byun
Published: 2025-10-27
================================================================================

Welcome back, everyone.
Thank you for joining us for another episode.
Now, Chris, you actually launched a new podcast this week and I kind of had this like inception
moment where I was sitting there listening to it and you were doing this bit, you're doing the
intro.
And I was kind of like, this is weird hearing you do it.
So maybe next time I'll get you to do it.
But do you want to tell us or just what this new podcast?
I know we touched on it last week, but if anyone's joining us again for the first time here, do you
want to touch on the new podcast?
Yeah, sure.
So it's called high performance Physiology.
We're going to basically talk about how Physiology can explain athletic performance training.
Obviously this podcast focuses on how Physiology explains hypertrophy training and then connects
that with pre steroid era bodybuilding.
But my new podcast with Rob Mouseri focuses on the athletic performance stuff.
So there's a little bit of overlap in places.
We'll obviously mention hypertrophy for athletes, but the focus is going to be a much broader remit.
Talking about neural adaptations, talking about tendon stretch, shortening cycle, proximal to
digital sequencing, all of that stuff.
I'm hoping to just bring a little bit of new Physiology, or not new Physiology, but Physiology that
people might not have realized is applicable into that space every week.
And it's, you know, probably a little bit shorter than what we spend here in terms of time, aiming
for 35 minutes, 40 minutes maybe tops, just to kind of capture an idea and bring that to people's
awareness.
And we'll see how it goes.
I mean, we recorded another episode on Friday, you know, and that'll be about maximum strength when
I finally managed to get that, as you say, you know, there's a definitely a gap between your
technical abilities in respect to these things and mine.
But, you know, we'll get it going and hopefully people will be able to benefit from that soon.
Awesome.
Yeah.
So if you're a coach and you work with athletes or people have mixed goals, and certainly that'll be
a podcast worth jumping to and listening to as well.
And you've got one episode out so far, like you said.
So we're doing the hypertrophy stuff, and I've got a hypertrophy plan for you guys.
And the plan I'm going to discuss today is quite different to what I've discussed in the past.
Maybe not the plan itself, but the context.
OK, so essentially, bear with me, but what we've got is actually this is out of character
completely, but a plan that was published much later than most of all, all of the plans we've talked
about so far.
In fact, it was published the year I was born.
And I'm not going to give away exactly when that was, but it's certainly well and truly after
anabolics entered bodybuilding.
So why am I talking about this plan?
Well, he comes from an article written by a bodybuilder named Jean Mosey.
So he was a bodybuilder from the 50s and 60s also like a a bodybuilding author, magazine editor,
attributor, all that kind of stuff.
And he shared.
So this workout that he discussed was actually passed on to him by the 1950 Mr. America winner, John
Farbotnick.
I'm not sure if I'm saying his name correctly.
He's not someone who I hear talked about a lot, but I think that's how you say it.
So this plan itself is a pre storied era plan, a plan from the 50s, but it was written down and
published in a magazine much later than that.
Now what's interesting about this plan is when John shared this with Jane.
So Jane was a bodybuilder at the time and he was going to to John's gym, I think it was in
California, somewhere like that.
And Jane had explained that he'd hit a plateau.
So he was already a competitive bodybuilder and had apparently, you know, not being able to gain any
new mass for a while.
And John looked at the plan that he was following.
And so at this point, this is kind of like, I guess, very early golden era.
Yeah.
So if Jane was competing fifties, 60s, you know, we're probably talking maybe 60s when he's visiting
John here.
So I'd sort of say that's probably, you know, late 50s would be that cut off at the end of the
silver era.
And John looked at the plan that Jane was following, and he said that he's not progressing because
he's doing too many sets.
He's doing too many repetitions and he's doing too many days per week, too many workouts.
So ultimately we've got this silver era guy looking at a golden era guy saying your volume is just
successive.
And Jane talked about when he actually cut the volume and followed this plan, he started progressing
again, which is interesting because this is not a low volume plan, but let me tell you the plan and
we can talk about it.
So for each set, there was about a, they said about a minute's rest.
Now they kind of said like some people need more, some people can do a little bit less.
So obviously like there's a lot of individual variability here, OK.
And also some like they started with the unilateral exercise and that's when they said take a minute
dress.
I'm not sure if they maybe went a little bit longer in the UNI in the bilateral exercises, but we
begin with a concentration curl.
And for each of these exercises, for the, there's two exercises, actually they're going to be
different, but most of them they're following a four set pyramid scheme.
So it's 1086 and then back off set of 15.
So concentration curl, we got four sets 10/8, 6:15.
And the way they discussed it, at least the way Jane discussed it was it was kind of like a couple
of reps in reserve maybe for those earlier sets.
And they specifically mentioned that 6 was done with as much weight as you could handle.
So I'm assuming sort of reading between the lines here, maybe a Rep and reserve or so for each of
these sets.
True set of 6 and then that back offset.
Then we go into squats.
Now the squats were done with an additional set.
So it's five sets of squats and the reps here.
So A108610868 and then there was another set of 6 and then a set of 15.
Was that too many sets, like 5 or 6 sets?
What was that 108686156 to 15?
So I think that's correct there.
So there was actually the reps there was like a Rep range that they gave for that.
That's the squat.
So it didn't follow that clear pyramid scheme that the other exercises followed.
It's still descending repetitions and then a sending backup.
So not not a fully uniform plan, I guess in the set of Rep structure.
Now the bench then follow the same as the squats.
We've got five sets of bench doing the descending and then ascending back up with the back off set.
And then we've got dumbbell rows to forward our four set pyramid.
So we've got 1086 and a back off set of 15 behind the neck with four the the pyramid scheme SO1086
and a back off set of 15.
We got 2 dumbbell extensions.
So this is usually done like a French press.
So you're seated, got the dumbbells behind your head.
And again, our pyramid scheme of 1086 and a back off set of 15 and then machine calf raises.
Now they didn't do this as a pyramid.
And again, I suspect this is probably just due to load availability.
That is four sets, 15 to 20.
I imagine they probably couldn't go heavy enough to do load repetitions, which is usually the case
with something like a calf raise.
And then finally finished with a single set of crunches.
Now they did suggest doing 30 to 50 repetitions of crunches.
Again, I suspect this is probably a load issue.
And it's interesting that that single sets, I mean you can talk about this from a recovery
standpoint, but theoretically you would think that a single set even with high repetitions like
that, you could potentially just get away with that.
Would you say from a recovery standpoint?
I don't know.
I mean, I guess so.
I mean, obviously this workout plan is being done, you know, three times a week.
So I think that just in general that the whole plan probably is pushing it a little bit in terms of
recovery capacity.
I mean, it's interesting that you said the context has been a downgrade in volume from what they
were doing previously, which is probably, you know, kind of adds credibility to the story that it
was, you know, kind of he wasn't progressing previously because he was doing too much.
Well, if he was doing a lot more than this, then definitely he was doing too much.
But you know, Even so, I mean, if, if those early sets are done with reps in reserve, then actually,
you know, a four set protocol 3 * a week isn't horrible.
If if if they're missing, you know, reps in reserve on some of those early sets.
And we said that doing a final set of back off with 15 probably would have pushed them, you know, up
to the limit.
So I would say that in general, this program is quite nice if they would just take the last back
off, set off and just don't do it.
You know, doing a, you know, kind of A1086 is actually pretty nice, especially if those first, you
know, that first set maybe has one or two reps in reserve and then the last set of 6 is to failure.
That's pretty cool.
I think that's a really nice protocol.
The 15 I don't like as regards, you know, 30 to 50 reps of crunches.
I think to be honest, most people aren't going to be anywhere close to failure doing that anyway.
So I think probably it's performative rather than actually productive.
Yeah, wasting me the time.
But in terms of exercise selection, so this, this, there's some nice stuff here.
It's nice to see dumbbell rows because you know that's that's a pretty solid sagittal play movement
in contract position, giving you a really good lat, especially upper lat development like the behind
the neck presses gives you some really good middle delt fits really well with the bench press to
round out you're pressing sort of muscles.
If you aren't tricep dominant in a bench press, then having those dumbbell extensions for the for
the triceps really kind of gives you that perfect sort of three kind of three for three on the
pressing stuff.
I always complain about the lack of decent pulling exercises, but you know, I think here Dunbar
Roses, probably one of my favorites if you're just going to do 1.
And then really there's not much else to say other than there's no hamstrings exercise.
I mean, it's like, what is it with these guys and picking?
Things.
I don't want to do a stiff leg or anything of that nature when it would be so easy to add in.
Yeah, I mean, I would have more exercise variety.
You probably would have more exercise variety, but you know, there's, there's some good coverage
there.
Yeah.
I think if you were to like, if I asked to write a beginner plan, it would look fairly similar to
this plus a hamstring exercise and even some of the exercises would actually be would be fairly
similar.
I would potentially sort of the bench.
I might use a machine or the dumbbell row.
I'll still do a Saturnal plane pool, but I'll use a machine effectively.
The movements would be actually quite similar and you know, the car phrase be the same squat
probably would, you know, maybe I'd want to have a leg tension in there.
But as an overall general more, you know, I don't want to say beginner because obviously that's a
different connotations to.
It's it's a program for somebody who is, who has bought themselves a power rack for their garage.
Yeah, you've got some weights, but all they've got is the power act, the bench and like barbell and
dumbbells.
And I mean, I'm describing my life for about 10 years in the past, you know, you obviously wouldn't
be able to do machine carve razors, but you can do, you know, you can, you can make it work with a
standing carve phrase and a barbell if you've got a block, you know.
Or if you need it to a dumbbell, yeah.
Yeah.
So you can do you can do curls, you can do use your incline bench to do a preacher curls.
You can do obviously squats, bench press and dumbbell rows is very easy on a bench in the power
rack.
You can do behind the neck presses, although you know, probably there are probably better to do
steep incline to be honest.
But this feels like a program that if not written for that purpose is like inspired by that kind of
environment.
If somebody's writing a program like this now, and that's because they've got access to a few
machines here and there and they're doing Internet commercial gym.
But the person who wrote this probably was training in in the environment that I've just described
because it feels like that kind of program, which makes sense if it's a silver air program.
Yeah, and I don't know what his gym was like.
That's a good point.
Like he could have just been an old school gym that just had weights and squat racks and pull up
bars and that's.
It's not far away from this at all.
Yeah, yeah.
Now just for clarity in case anyone wants to know for sure.
So my little dyslexic moment where I couldn't work out the sets.
So they're sets of five.
Yeah, I think you're reading there was a 10 and a six and a five.
That's the so it actually does follow the pyramid that you were looking.
For yes, we just had an additional set added in and that's what's for me.
I can count to 4, but apparently 4:50 is but yes, still add a little pyramid.
Anything else worth mentioning about this?
I do like it as a home workout.
Obviously there's there's changes I would make and like you said, the back off set, I mean nothing.
I had a question this week about back offsets and someone's like, oh, you know, I love back offsets.
What are they doing?
What are they doing differently?
And ultimately they're not doing anything differently.
They're just doing the exact same thing but adding a little.
Bit of extra fatigue, I have to say, you know, on paper initially before you have a model of like
the stimulating rates model, you know, on paper and you know, initially you might go, oh, well, it's
just a really easy way of adding an extra bit of volume.
And but then when you look at the stimulating rates model, you realize you're creating a lot of
extra fatigue.
You're not really getting much more stimulus because you're on the kind of the flat path to the dose
response curve by that point.
And you know, you're kind of like probably a bit tired already in these fatigue mechanisms and
stuff.
So you're not really going to kind of benefit much, right?
But you're creating a lot of D.
But then also, I think, you know, it's worth sort of suggesting to people that they just try and see
what happens if they're doing a normal routine, like a three set routine and they say, well, OK, if
you're so interested in it, just take a couple of exercises, put a back off set in and see what
happens.
My personal experience has been I never get a sore, you know, as I do when I do back off sets.
If I just like I've described to you that there's a part of the world that I sometimes go to which
will remain nameless.
And when I'm training there, it's really busy.
The gyms are just absolutely packed out and you have to kind of get on a machine and own it for the
period of time when you're training.
Otherwise people constantly asking to kind of working with you or just like wanting to, you know,
throw you off and you know, kind of sit in your place.
So you kind of like end up doing rest pause or drop set or back offsets or anything you can just to
keep moving on the machine.
Otherwise you're going to get, you know, kind of evicted.
And I'm always always just so sore when I train in that way.
And I think it's from my my personal experience is that it adds soreness and discomfort and muscle
damage and fatigue without really giving me anything back in terms of, you know, kind of stimulus in
terms of muscle growth.
You know, I think as I said earlier, when we're talking about the the overall program, looking at
the program set Rep schemes, I would just take that back offset out and just don't do it.
Everybody kind of looks at back offset.
Oh, they're just such an easy way to add a bit of extra volume.
And like, no, they're not.
You're not getting much stimulating effect from them.
And you're also just going to make yourself sore and you're going to accumulate fatigue because
you're not going to get the recovery for the next workout in time.
So, you know, it's just one of those things that feels like a good idea to begin with, and I just
think it doesn't make sense.
Yeah, exactly that 1086, I actually quite like that.
Maybe like for me, when I use it with my own programs, I'm more likely to do like an 864 than a
1086, but I don't mind it because that 10 generally speaking, you're not going to need many warm up
sets to do a set of 10 for most exercises.
Like you, you know, do 1, you feel pretty good.
Most people are going to be generally OK to go into that set of 10, maybe one more warm up set and
then do the set of 10.
And it's a way, whereas, you know, if you were to start with a set of 6 or you start with, you know,
lower repetitions, most people generally going to feel like they require more warm up sets to feel
comfortable, feel like, you know, the, the coordination, the movement is good, it's rehearsed and go
to that heavier load.
So using that 1086, it's almost like you're using that 10, almost like a warm up set for that 8 and
that six, but you're still decreasing the amount of repetition.
So you're not causing this excessive, you know, unnecessary fatigue.
And if you were just doing 10s, like it's kind of nice doing that descending reps gain.
OK, I don't know what to say about that.
No, Well, it's just, I think I'm becoming more and more sort of minimalist in terms of things like
warm ups.
And I mean, really when you look at the concepts that underpin warmups, you realize that the way
most people are doing them is nonsense.
You know, I mean, sure, if you need a warm up to, to do a set of squats, because I mean, I, I've
understand that.
I mean, I've done that.
You know, you need to just keep incrementally working way up to the work way because otherwise you
just get squashed.
But you know, if you're talking about say, a machine exercise in a gym, then really most of the
benefits of an actual warm up as we understand them physiologically are coming from physically
warming the muscle up, which is not going to happen on the exercise itself.
It's going to happen in whatever you did before that in your actual, you know, kind of aerobic
exercise, warm up.
And then secondly, it's going to come from the post activation potential nation effect, which is
single reps with a high velocity and a high effort or high effort doesn't have to be high velocity,
but it usually is.
So really my kind of approach to warms is, is very different from most people's now anyway, unless
as I say you, you know, you're talking about a technique dominant excise like a bench press.
You know, obviously this is a multi joint.
Most of these are only so everything here is a compound list.
I mean he's got apart from the curls going to squat bench Rd.
So those potentially would be those types of exercises that may benefit from those who.
Did to be honest, even with something like a leg press, you know, I'm not going to be doing
monstrous numbers of warm up sets, you know, I think.
And if you make any of these machine exercises, like, you know, you say bench press, but if you were
to move to a chest press, again, the same thing.
Becomes a different story.
You know, I'm not doing, you know, 10 sets of warm up for a for a chest press, which I probably
would do for a bench press.
Yeah, no, exactly right.
No, I'm thinking more from like a compound lift perspective.
With a yeah, in a in a free weight situation.
So, you know, I think there's there's, there's, there's a complexity there which is difficult to
immediately get to grips with unless you look at the Physiology.
And if anyones curious about warmups, we do have an entire podcast on warmups and how we do them and
what's happening physiologically.
So I do recommend you listen to that.
Now, what we're going to talk about today specifically is kind of this notion.
Then Jane pointed to when he said that, hey, you know, John told me I was doing too much and I had
to cut back on sets and reps and days, and then I started progressing again.
And ultimately that's pointing to this concept of fatigue, or more specifically, fatigue
accumulating.
And that's what you want to touch on today, isn't it?
Yeah.
So the, the reason for talking about this is because there's a little bit of a maybe a little bit of
confusion, maybe a little bit of argumentation, but it's good again, like it's because people are
trying to understand the core nature of this physiological concept.
So I just want to understand what is happening in order to allow post workout fatigue to accumulate.
So very, very briefly, I'm just going to give a 2 minute intro to what we're actually describing.
So fatigue is the object of external measurement.
So when we measure fatigue, what we're saying is we're measuring reduction in strength as a result
of a previous part of exercise.
So it's, it's not an amorphous kind of thing like stress is.
Fatigue is an objective measurement that we can record either in the gym or with a dynamometer or
something like that.
Now the mechanisms of fatigue are then the physiological changes that caused that reduction in
strength.
Now in the post workout period, all of these post workout fatigue mechanisms are caused by
calciumion accumulation either indirectly or directly during the workout.
So we do a workout, we produce calcium accumulation and that then causes sort of excitation and
direction coupling failure.
Here is the kind of primary one that's immediately caused.
It then lasts for a day or two after the workout or longer.
If you do a really damaging workout off the back of that calcium accumulation, you're also then
going to get muscle damage.
And then on the back of that you're going to get an inflammatory response that causes supraspinal
central nervous system fatigue, which is a reduction in the ability to recruit motor units for a
given level of effort.
So you've got these and now there's other stuff going on as well, but for the purpose of hypertrophy
and the purposes of post work apity accumulation, we don't really we need to talk about that.
It's these are the primary three that you'll kind of you need to get to grips with.
Now once you've got that basic framework, what you're going to see is that the fatigue mechanisms
take a slightly different period of time to dissipate.
So your excitation, congestion, coming failure is the one that sort of occurs most quickly during
workout itself and stays pretty high or pronounced for at least a day or so afterwards and then kind
of drifts into that second day.
You know, if you, as I say, do an eccentric only workout, you might see it drifting longer, but
poorly speaking in the context of normal strength training, it's a 48 hour phenomenon more or less.
Now that's really switching off the fiber.
To the activation point, so you can activate a fibre as much as you want, but if you've got the
excitation interaction, coupling failure in place and essentially what's happening is that the two
sides of the triadic junction are not connecting.
And you're not going to get the inflow of calcium ions into the fibre to the same extent as you
would do if you had that connection still in, you know, kind of it's in normal state.
So it's stopping you from using the cross bridges in the way that you would normally do.
And obviously that reduces the ability to produce force, which is what we then recognise as the
fatigue mechanism.
Secondly, you've then got the muscle damage, which is the damage to the myofibrils.
And when you damage that, obviously you can't actually connect the cross bridge formations, you
know, either with the external parts of the muscle cell to transmit that force or you can't actually
produce them in the first place because the myofibrils aren't working or they're gone because you've
destroyed them.
I mean, various possibilities.
And again, again, reduces force, creates fatigue.
And of course, with the superspinal fatigue through inflammatory response.
Oh, no, sorry.
In terms of muscle damage in its duration, this can really last as how long as a piece of string?
So you can create a tiny bit of it and go relatively quickly, or you can create a lot of it.
And it could actually, you know, sort of be so severe that the cell takes a very, very long time to
recover from.
And really that's the modifiable part that we're going to be talking about.
As we talk about, you know, how long does fatigue take to repair?
Well, if you really smash a muscle fiber to pieces with a lot of calcium accumulation, the big
inflammatory response, and you really start to dismantle it in terms certainly it can take up to
four weeks to fully repair.
Now generally we don't see things going on longer than that because ultimately if a fiber is in such
a bad state that it's going to take 4 weeks to recover, it will go in the chronic dye and they'll
grow a new fiber inside the old cell membrane.
That's called regeneration.
Now, incidentally, that terminology is very fixed in sports science.
We talk about regeneration.
Well, maybe not in hypertrophy science, but it is in the Physiology.
Physiology refers to regeneration when you grow a new fiber inside an old fiber cell membrane
because you've completely destroyed the old fiber.
Relatively rare in voluntary strength training in humans.
Can happen in certain voluntary exercise situations, but generally speaking is more common in rodent
models and electrical stimulation even in humans actually you can get it with electrical
stimulation, but that's for reasons or perhaps talk about another time.
So really you're, you're kind of like anywhere between zero time and four weeks as you kind of
recovery period from muscle damage to spend depending on what you have done.
And then finally, you've got superspinal CNS fatigue, which is governed by the inflammatory
response.
The inflammatory response is governed by your muscle damage state.
So it tends to be basically a little bit like a day or two faster to recover than whatever muscle
damage you've created.
So if you create a five day worth of muscle damage recovery period, you're going to have say 3 or 4
days worth of the superspinal fatigue.
And ultimately the purpose of this is to just stop you from using those fibers while you are
recovering.
So the idea behind this mechanism of fatigue is to stop you from training fibres while they're in
the processes of trying to repair themselves or even in the case of even regenerate themselves.
So there's, I think there's one study in eccentric only training in the biceps where they managed to
get 8 or 9 days worth of superspinal CSD because they just smashed the muscle to bits or some of the
fibers in the muscle to bits.
And they created a really, really long period of muscle damage.
And of course that meant that the brain was trying to stop you from using that muscle or that level
of motive recruitment across any muscle really, because it's a central phenomenon.
So it's going to affect all your muscles while the muscles were in the process of repairing
themselves.
So those are the three mechanisms of fatigue that we're talking about.
There are other post workout fatigue mechanisms, but they really aren't important in the same to the
same extent that these three are.
So what we're expecting to see after any strength training workout is a period of time in which
these three mechanisms are present.
But as I say, excitation, congestion, coupling failure will be the biggest one in the first day or
so.
After that, muscle damage will be kind of taking over, will be much more prominent, and the CST will
just lag the muscle damage by a day or two, depending on, you know, when I say lag, I mean it'll
recover slightly faster than the muscle damage because it tends to be like the last bit of muscle
damages out there on its own.
And the superspinal fatigue has kind of recovered a little bit faster than that.
So that's the general shape of things.
Does that kind of hang together for you?
Yeah, so the superspinal CNS fatigue.
So that kind of knocks a day off on both ends then, doesn't it?
Well, there is definitely a delay before it gets going.
Yeah, absolutely.
I wouldn't say it's a whole day at the beginning.
Really we're looking at the process by which the muscle damages startings.
As we've talked about before, muscle damage doesn't really get going until sort of the first few
hours post workout.
So you've got calcium and accumulation in the workout causing excitation, contraction, coupling
failure and other calcium.
I'm related to D mechanisms.
In the post workout period, you get a continued accumulation of calcium ions or a sustained
accumulation of calcium ions and that then causes the calpain kind of production, which then causes
the damage to the myofibrils.
And that process of damaging the myofibrils probably takes about 12:00 or so hours before it's
really kind of got into a mature state.
I would say super spinal fatigue is probably kicking in around about the 8 to 12 hour mark post
workout, maybe something like that.
And then it's going to carry on getting worse as the inflammatory process really gets going.
I mean, we don't really see an inflammatory process inside the muscle until like 4 to 6 hours post
workout.
After that you're then going to start to see it moving into the bloodstream and then being detected
by the brain and that's when you get the Super spinal CST effect.
I wouldn't want to be super like dogmatic about the exact hours at these points these things are
happening because I have a very strong belief that the process self regulates according to the
ultimate amount of damage that you're going to end up with.
So if you create a massive amount of customer accumulation by doing, you know, something silly like
10 sets of Nordics, then ultimately you're creating in a situation where the amount of damage you're
going to end up with is going to be really huge.
And that amount of damage when you it gets to its maximum point is probably going to be about 3 days
post workout because it's going to take all that time to do all of that the degradation of the
muscle tissue to the point when you reach your maximum amount of muscle damage.
So I would say that you'd probably see a slower longer sort of trajectory into your Max muscle
damage and your Max superspinal CMT than you would do if you just did you know once it failure with
Tamara Max of a, you know hamstrings curl on the machine, then you're going to hit Max damage
probably within about 12 hours.
The interesting thing is if you look at the rodent studies, when they do crazily kind of workout
analogues in rodent models where they're doing like, you know, 500 eccentric reps with maximum
electrical stimulation, it takes like 3 or 4 days to get to the point where the maximum amount of
damage has happened.
And then you start seeing myofibrils just evaporating from the muscle tissue and it's just
actinomyosin content to the fiber just disappears because you've got to the point where the fiber is
now getting to the point where it's just degraded all of that protein and it's starting to throw it
out.
But that takes a lot longer to happen when you create a really, really using workout.
I think people have got to get into the sort of out of the mindset that the damage is happening in
the workout itself and understand that it's a process.
And if you're creating a process that's really damaging, it's going to take a lot longer to get, you
know, sort of finished than it would do if you're doing a much smaller damaging process.
Some people got really confused when I sort of started to explain how muscle damage happens in the
post workout period because they thought that because when we look in rodent models of really severe
damage, it takes two or three days to get to the point where the really severe damage is kind of
finished happening.
People are like, well, how does that make sense?
You know, if I'm doing a workout on a Monday, how can I possibly be repaired by Wednesday?
I'm so well, because if you're creating less damage, it takes less time to actually get to peak
damage point.
You know, so it's like imagine that you've got to go down a hill and if you're only going a short
way down there, that only takes you 12 hours to get that way down there.
If you're creating like 3 days worth of damage, it's going to take you 3 days to get to that point
where you created three days worth of damage.
It's like whatever signaling you start in the workout itself is then determining how long you go
before you get to that peak damage point.
More damage takes longer to actually produce in the post workout period.
Not before you even talk about recovery.
You know, it's like how long does it take to actually create the damage, you know, based on the
signaling that I started in the workout.
Well, if you create in a bigger amount of signaling, the workout is going to take a little longer to
actually happen.
Yeah, that makes sense.
So you talked about in some of the studies using eccentric only contractions and stacks of them and
you said it could be like up to four weeks recovery and beyond that the cells going to die.
Now if you were talking like standard concentric eccentric training that someone might do in a gym
setting, what might be their kind of ceiling as to what is how long a single workout the recovery
for that might push out to?
So we've got, I mean, the infographic that I always use or always referred to in this to answer this
question is that one where I just did a linear kind of chart showing that there's a relatively
strong linear relationship between the number of sets you do for a muscle in a workout and how long
it takes to recover from that workout.
In terms of post workout fatigue.
Broadly speaking, you know, we're looking at kind of it takes sort of about sort of 48 hours to
recover from three sets to failure with a moderate load of a normal strength joining excise like a
leg press, probably 72 hours to recover from five sets.
And if you kind of extrapolate that up and you look at the longest times that it's taking people to
recover, you're probably looking about, you know, sort of 10 to 12 sets for a muscle, you're going
to take about a week to recover from that.
So if you're doing a full on absolutely by the book, you know, pro split where you're literally
trying to, you know, you're doing all single joint exercises and you're just training individual
muscles in each workout.
You technically can do a kind of 1 muscle group per day, you know, and come back to it the following
week and you'd be doing about 11:50 sets, I think to to to sort of see that working more or less as
intended.
Now obviously that doesn't take supraspinal central nervous deemed into account, but you know, as
written that's the purpose of that.
Would be.
So we're talking maybe like you said up to about a week or so.
Now something that I think most people aren't going to realize is that fatigue can accumulate.
So we're not just talking about the fatigue within that single session that it can actually have an
additive effect across multiple sessions for the same muscle.
Yeah, this is really where I think a lot of the science based lifting community are very interested
in this concept at the moment and they're kind of trying to figure out why it happens and how it
happens and what's going on.
You know, is fatigue fiber specific?
And if it's fiber specific, how does that work?
So yes, obviously you know, pretty much everything is muscle fiber specific.
But you know, you've got to also bear in mind that the when the brain is producing supraspinal or
experiencing supraspinal central nervous system fatigue, it doesn't really know what you're doing in
terms of the movement pattern and the muscle fibers that you're using for that purpose.
That's neuro mechanical matching.
All it knows is that it's, it's experiencing a feeling as a result of the interleukins in the
bloodstream that it's detecting across the bone area.
It's then producing a suppression of your ability to recruit motor units by reducing the maximum
amount of central motor command for the maximum tolerable perception of effort.
So what it's really doing is just kind of saying we're going to stop you from activating the top 10%
of every single motor unit in the body.
That's that's all it's saying in any movement you do now, as we all know, if you start changing
things, so like, you know, taking the top 10% of the motive so you can recruit off in a, you know,
sort of squat is different from taking the top 10% off in a single leg leg press or even a single
leg knee extension.
I mean, you're reducing the amount of muscle mass you're using, you're accessing more motions. the
Super spinal fatigue is going to be less impactful.
You know, kind of it's going to not less impactful.
It's exactly the same impact.
It's going to be a different number of motor units that you can't access, you know, relative to your
maximum level in the kind of squat and it would be in a single leg knee extension simply because
you're starting from different points in terms of access to motor units in those two exercises.
But what's what what we're seeing here then is that we've got a a brain driven effect which is
relating to access to motor units and then a muscle fibre related effect which is relating to the
excitation contraction coupling failure, which is muscle fibre specific.
And the muscle damage, of course myofibles being inside muscle fibers, therefore muscle damage must
also be muscle fiber specific.
So that's kind of, you know, the context that we're looking at.
So if we're talking about accumulating fatigue, then you know, how does that happen?
Well, basically the starting with the easy, the easy kind of side of things, the supraspinal central
nervous system dig is a blanket like 5 percent, 10% reduction in machine occurrence.
So if I do, if I use exactly the same exercise and movement pattern in multiple workouts, then what
you're going to find is that yes, in that particular instance, my superspinal fatigue from generated
from the muscle damage I created in the previous workout should overlap pretty well with the muscle
fibers that I'm using again.
So let's say I do some hamstrings exercise and I do a seated leg curl, which, you know, it's going
to preference certain of the hamstrings muscles and certain parts of the hamstrings muscles compared
to say a line leg curl or a, you know, 45° back extension.
So I've done my line leg.
I come back the next workout and I do a sorry seated leg.
I do my seat to leg.
I come back the following workout and I do exactly the same seat to leg go.
And I've got some superspinal CNFT from the damage that I created still there because I maybe did
six sets or whatever, you know.
So I do six sets, I come back the next work and I've still got some damage present.
I've still got some superspinal CNFT relating to that damage being present when I do that exact same
exercise again.
What I should find is that the Super spinal fatigue stops me from using most of the damaged fibers.
If I did a lying leg curl, it would be different fibers because I've actually now got a deficit that
effects because I'm new.
Mechanical matching has changed which focus I'm now experiencing.
You're going to find that I experienced different fibers.
Now, what you might find as a result of doing that is that some of the damaged fibers that you
created in your seat, some of the fibers that you damaged in your seat to let go might now fall into
you're being used because they're now outside of your, your, your bracket.
So like maybe there are some fibers that you trained in your seated leg go, which only really got
activated because they weren't that useful, but they kind of did get triggered eventually when you
got really high.
Now they're much more useful in your line there because they get used earlier in the sequence
because of neuron chemical matching.
Now you're going to be training damaged fibers.
Does that make sense?
So that you've got this mismatch between what the brain is trying to do to protect you and what
you're actually doing in terms of using those it's fibers.
Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.
So you know, the Super spinal CNS fatigue, that's like you said, that's just a generic reduction.
And so that could be on a totally different muscle, totally different exercise.
It just so happens in this scenario someone who's training the same muscle with a different
exercise.
So that's a, that's a really interesting scenario and that's.
I'm just using that as an illustration of the fact that they're not 100% lined up with each other.
Yeah.
But that that has two different implications as well.
I'm trying to think through what does that mean if someone's doing full body ABC compared to full
body.
A, A, A or even AB actually.
Yeah.
Obviously we're talking, this is in the context of volume being not being covered by that session.
But even in an IAB that's feasible, although you probably wouldn't be wanting to train that muscle
again in maybe if you knew using volume that was going to be under covered.
That's interesting.
I'm gonna have to think through that after this, but continue on.
Yeah.
So the purpose of explaining that is just to show people that the supraspinal cynetic effect is a
blanket effect that affects every muscle in the body.
And as a result, you're going to get this mismatch between what the brain is trying to do or is
being forced to do and and what your intention is in terms of training that muscle.
Also, if we look at the kind of fatigue mechanisms inside the muscle, excitation congestion coupling
failure is also designed to protect the muscle fiber and stop you from damaging it further.
But, and this is the really important, but it is not perfect.
So we've got some really nice data showing that if you stimulate the fiber electrically while it is
experiencing excitation contraction coupling failure, you still create some calcium accumulation.
It's just not as fast as if it wasn't experienced excitation contraction coupling.
So you still get calcium ion accumulation even though you're not really training the fiber
effectively.
So it's not a perfect protective mechanism the way that you know we would want it to be.
So just to be clear, the reason that we have excitation projection government failure is to stop the
fiber from producing cross bridge formations and using a lot of ATP.
Because using auto ATP in situations where you've got low glycogen inside the fiber, it could
actually, you know bring it down to zero and then the fiber will go and necroptic and die.
So we're trying to avoid that happening.
And as a result this mechanism of fatigue exists.
But as I say it's not perfect and it still allows calcium and accumulation which is the driver for
the muscle damage processes inside the fibers.
Even though we've got excitation direction governing failure present, we're still not actually
protecting the fibers 100%.
So you can have if that fatigue mechanism present and obviously if you've got that fatigue mechanism
present, you're also going to have myofibular damage present and that is why you can have a damaged
fiber.
And if you've got access to it via the brain.
So if the brain isn't protecting it via superspinal fatigue, you can have a scenario where it will
continue to accumulate extra the calcium ions on top of the ones that you've already put in there
and you'll make the damage worse than it already was.
So I think there's this idea that if a fiber has experienced calcium, I'm relative Tigue, it's
completely 100% switched off.
And I think maybe I've been guilty of that simplification in the past.
Certainly not true.
And as a result, you know, you kind of can't make it worse in terms of damage.
We can, You can make it worse because there is leak of calcium ions into the fiber and that will
then make the damage worse on top of what you've already got there.
Yeah, yeah.
So that's, that's really how you can get a damaged fiber.
Now the Super spinal fatigue as I pointed out earlier is not going to match perfectly with the
fibers that you've used.
So you will get a little bit of crossover, damaged crossover, you'll get a little bit of extra
damage happening as a result of that problem.
But you can also, as you see, because the superspinal fatigue recovers faster than the muscle damage
itself does, you can get extra damage happening in that sort of precisely when you would probably be
doing that work out again if you were doing it just slightly too soon.
So if you're doing like we were describing 5 or 6 sets and you really needed to do 3 or 4 to be able
to recover in your sort of 48 hour window.
And you're literally your superspinal fatigue might be just coming off, you know, kind of its peak
point and starting to dissipate back to 0.
But your muscle damage hasn't repaired.
And then you dump a load more calcium items on top of your existing damage and you're now going to
end up in a bigger hole in terms of the damage than you were previously.
So hopefully this is starting to make some more sense to why we can actually accumulate fatigue on
top of the fatigue we've already had in the previous worker.
Something I'm finding interesting in this conversation is how much different splits could actually
be affecting this.
So if you then, so obviously we'd mentioned a moment ago full body ABC versus or AB versus A, A, A.
But then even if you what you've just said there about obviously the superspinal CNS fatigue
dropping off a little bit sooner than the muscle damage.
So theoretically, one of the more protective splits in that scenario could be like an upper lower
AA, A/B, A/B, right?
Because you're actually getting more superspinal CNS again from another workout.
Yeah, but you're paying a cost of not being able to train the fibres to do that.
So this is, this is one of those situations where you have to keep all of the things in your head at
the same time because as soon as you just go, OK, my focus now is on making sure I don't get any
muscle damage death.
I want superspinal CST.
And it's like, well, hang on a minute.
If you just go back to the similar side of the equation, it's like, well, no, I don't want
superspinal CST much better just kind of keep your volume a little bit lower than you think you do
need.
So I think there's this tendency that's been still carried over from the previous kind of norms that
we have in the in the science based lifting community where people were just doing silly volumes all
the time.
I think people still want to kind of do what's the maximum volume that I can get away with?
And I'm like just discount that back 25%, just kind of take a set off, whatever you think that
number is because?
You'll find that you make sure you go into each successive workout with that lack of any kind of
fatigue mechanism whatsoever, and then you're not in that interesting danger zone, which is where
superspinal fatigue is backed off, and now you're in a position where you can actually more easily
create an accumulation of damage.
Yeah.
That additional potential benefit from that one additional set is so, so, so minor at that point,
and yet the potential downside.
Especially if you're talking about going from, say, two to three or three to four or something like
that.
I mean, arguably if you're talking about going from 1:00 to 2:00, you know, yeah, there's that sort
of extra 40% that you might get from that second set, which is not insignificant, you know.
But if you're talking about.
Going from no one at that point is 1.
You can recover from an additional set if they're doing one set every 28 hours every 48 hours
though.
I find and I find my age going from one set to two sets for an exercise does make a meaningful
difference in terms of fatigue.
OK, I shouldn't say no one.
Most people, probably.
Because you're old and very fast twitch then you will find that you will be in the space where one
to going from 1:00 to 2:00 does make a difference.
Which apparently is not 99% of TikTok, no.
No, I come back in 25 years time and tell me how you feel.
To go back to my split.
More than that, I think most of these guys are kind of probably close to 30 years younger.
Yeah, give it another decade on top of that.
Of the decade.
To go back to the split though, that would then suggest like the broader the split or the, the
higher the rotation, the worse this could potentially be in terms of accumulation of fatigue.
So if you think about a gross split or you think about an upper lower ABCD rotation, that to me
sounds just off what we've talked about here as the worst possible options.
Like if you're doing a gross split and you've got one muscle which is has a significant overlap with
another muscle a couple days later.
And like you just mentioned, with neuro mechanical matching you could be.
Having but yes, but you've got the same point that you also raised, which is that if you are
training with something like a breastplate or an upper lower, upper, lower, upper lower, you're
creating so much super spinal CNST from everything every day that you go in the gym that you
probably permanently suppressing that top level of recruitment anyway.
I don't you can see where you're going with this, but ultimately I think it's it's not necessarily
going to be chained to one particular split.
It's just going to be, you know, really looking at are you going into the next workout with all your
super spine off team mostly recovered but still with some damage lagging.
But that's the danger zone really, because that's the situation where you're going to find that you
are able to just go in and create a bigger problem on top of the.
Yeah, Yeah.
That's interesting.
Yeah.
I mean even, you know, thinking now like so then up or lower say, I know you said get away from the
split, but and if you were doing up or lower ABCD, that second upper you've had the day you've done
up or lower day off, you go back to upper potentially some of that super spinal C&S fatigue is gone.
You now have this problem like that's the worst case of, you know, worse of both worlds.
I mean, they've got potentially novel exercises or different exercises from the first upper.
We've got different.
I think the novelty of exercise definitely does raise problems with that.
Pneumococcal matching mean you're not crossing over perfectly.
And I think that is especially problematic when you're looking at very different exercise.
Like I mean, I picked the hamstrings for a reason because when you're looking at the difference
between say 45° back extension versus any of the leg curls, you're literally talking about upper
versus lower hamstring.
And similarly, if you're comparing lying leg curl with seat to leg Co, you know, on the one side
you've got short head of the vice, it's more as working a lot.
On the other side, you know, you've got maybe the long head and the semi membranosis working quite a
lot.
So you know, you're going to find that there's big differences in which moting order you see in the
recruitment, sort of.
Yeah.
And so potentially something like the quads might be a little bit, I must say safeguard.
It because yeah, totally differentially, totally different.
If they say lats, that could be a problem again.
Yeah.
No, that would be another great example of one that is, is kind of, you know, both regions can do
both things.
It's just that one has so much better leverage than the other in in that context.
So you tend to get a different order of recruitment.
So, you know, you might find that, yeah, you do, you know, you kind of narrow grip row and you're
using very little of that on a very little, but using relatively little of that lower region of
that, except when you get to the top end of the motor, you might pull some of those motor units in.
But then the opposite happens the other way around when you do a wide grip pull down.
So yeah, you could find that, you know, you damage some fibers doing, you know, a kind of narrow
grip row.
And then the next worker, you do a wide grip pull down and immediately pretty much those fibers are
being used, you know, kind of as soon as you start the set.
And it's like, that's a really bad outcome.
I mean, not really bad as in there are worse things, but that wouldn't be a great situation to be in
because.
That's so interesting.
No one really thinks about that when when people are talking about lats.
I've never heard that conversation come up.
You know, obviously lats are a hot topic and everyone's like, you know, can.
Probably because I've not said it before.
I mean, ultimately pretty much everything comes back to what the model that I've developed says.
So if I don't point it out, it may not necessarily get talked about, but.
But think about it, if you weren't sure, if someone's saying, well, you may as well just Chuck it,
you know, do four sets of your central plane row on one day and do your frontal plane, you know,
pull down the other day.
Like this is just another reason where it's like, hey, it's just safer not to do that.
It's, yeah.
It means that you're less likely to run into this particular problem that we're describing today.
So let's keep going with the accumulation because I don't know if we've.
Got there yet?
No, there's loads more to say so the next thing I wanted to just talk people through.
Now we've established how the Physiology works and why it's interesting and how you can accumulate
the post work epity.
I want to explain what the literature says and why it looks a little bit confusing using when you
first look at it.
So very brief history lesson in terms of exercise science coverage on this topic.
If you go back to the maybe 1990s and you look at the research that was being done, you'll find that
as most of the post workout fatigue literature is, it's an eccentric only contractions trying to
produce a lot of fatigue because I want to create a big effect to study it.
It works the same way.
It's just a bigger magnitude of effect.
So they do these, I get ahead of myself.
It doesn't actually work the same way for reasons I'll explain.
Well, it does, but it doesn't.
I'll explain.
So you've got these studies in eccentric only contractions producing a lot to post worker fatigue.
And one of the questions that people were interested in answering was, you know, does post workout T
accumulate?
If I do a eccentric any workout on Monday and then I come back and I repeat that workout on
Wednesday or Thursday and then I track the fatigue.
You know, in both situations once where I, you know, just do the Monday workout and then watch how
post workout T comes back.
Baseline, baseline maybe takes a week and a half to come back to baseline.
And then I do another example where I have or another group of people and they train Monday and
Thursday.
And again, I just track the post workout fatigue.
Watch it come back to baseline.
Now if post workout fatigue is accumulating, what you should find is that the Thursday workout
causes a slower return to baseline from the Monday original workout.
If you starting the measurements from that point, it should cause you a slower return to baseline
compared to the Monday only workout.
Does that make sense now?
They're basically justification last longer.
You should find it takes you longer to get back to 0 strength loss compared to just doing the Monday
workout on its own.
Now what happens is in most of these studies, if not all of them, what happened was that the
Thursday workout called caused a little blip, as in it did, you know, obviously create a post
workout fatigue effect, very minor one, but post workout fatigue from the first workout ultimately
went back to baseline at the same speed as it did without that Thursday workout.
You know, if you drop down to like 50% of your maximum strength on the Tuesday after the Monday
workout and you were back up at 100% again the following Friday, a week on the following Friday,
like a week and a half later, then it didn't matter whether you did the Thursday workout or not.
You still got back to baseline a week and 1/2 after the Monday workout.
It didn't actually create any more post work appetite.
That's what kind of switched Physiology researchers onto this idea that post work appetite
mechanisms are protective.
They're stopping you from creating further problems.
Now, that's actually how all fatigue works all of the time.
And now fatigue Physiology is kind of in that understanding more or less.
I mean, you find some people somewhere that still believe this, that it's not, you know, most people
most of the time working in the space kind of accepted the idea that fatigue mechanisms are
fundamentally protective all the time, whether it's in the workout or post workout or another.
But you know, this was kind of something that really switched people onto this idea that post
workout fatigue was stopping you from creating more of a problem and therefore you couldn't really
accumulate post workout fatigue.
And that was kind of like one of those things that fatigue physiologists kind of went, that's
interesting, but it doesn't really fit with our day-to-day experience.
And then they kind of left it and didn't think about it anymore.
Later on on, the same kind of studies were sort of done relating to normal strength training.
So we've got two or three studies of these type now where one of them is concentric only
contractions with a light load.
One of them is blood flow restriction with normal strength training, otherwise just kind of
concentric eccentric.
I think another one might be the same.
But broadly speaking, they're not like purely vanilla, but they're close enough for us to be able to
work with.
These do show a very clear pattern of post work optic accumulating.
So in this case, you would do the Monday or you know, say Monday, Wednesday, Friday workouts and you
would see as long as they're doing excessive volumes, you would see a gradual progression of
increasing strength loss over time.
So not like we see with the eccentric only studies of the 90s, they're completely different animals.
They're showing completely different things.
The question then is, well, why do we see such completely different results?
And the very simple answer is that muscle damage is caused by calcium and accumulation, which is
essentially and the problem of calcium and accumulation is heavily dependent on the oxidative
capacity of the muscle fiber.
So you could only really create accumulated damage or any kind of meaningful damage in fast twitch
fibers.
You just can't do it to the same extent in slow twitch fibers.
So if you now go back understanding that you go back to your eccentric only studies in the Disney
go, if I do a silly eccentric coning workout on a Monday and I come back and measure strength loss
on a Tuesday and I'm down, strength loss is 50%.
I've lost half my strength, which is actually not uncommon in this kind of study.
Then in that scenario, I'm pretty confident I'm not accessing either through superspinal fatigue or
excitation injection company fair.
I've pretty much lost ex access to half the muscle, which is all of my fast rich fibers.
If I'm now trying to work out on Thursday, I've not really created any further damage because I'm
not really accessing most of the fast rich fibers.
There might be a tiny little bit of an effect, but it's not going to get picked up really in the
grand scheme of things within two individual differences.
In contrast, if I create a 10% strength loss, I've still got 40% more fast 5 fast rich fibers to
play with.
You know, I've still got a lot of more damage I can create before things get to the point where it
becomes unmanageable.
So what I would say is that if you want to think about post work up to accumulation as a thing in
the context of normal strength training, you've basically got the ability to create continue
accumulating damage until you get to a 50% strength loss, at which point you won't get any further.
So if you go back to those silly high volume programs of like sort of 5-10 years ago, yeah, you
could just kind of throw volume at people until they accumulated so much fatigue that they were like
at 50% strength loss, at which point they would just bump along baseline and not really a new
baseline of strength and they just stay there and wouldn't really get any worse.
But you're not really training anything at that point because you're not really recruiting any
meaningful amounts of high pressure emotions.
You're not really creating much mechanical tension in form of cross bridge formations because you're
excitation and traction coupling failure and muscle damage.
And basically the the mode units that you can still access at that point really are going to be the
ones who have muscle fibers that aren't going to hypertrify.
In any person that is meaningfully developed has, you know, a training history of a year or two.
Yeah, absolutely.
And actually, if you think about it, you are going to start experiencing atrophy now no matter how
many times you go to the gym a week, because you're not actually in the.
So in that scenario you could accumulate damage up until that point.
Exactly.
And I understand.
It's how many workouts it takes to get there.
Yeah, Yeah, exactly.
And I would expect that that would then probably take about the the maximum of four weeks to
recover.
Incidentally, if you look at the new studies that have been done in the context of relatively of
another strength training programs, kind of looks like you can do a fatigue debt calculation.
If you, if you do say, if you're, if you're recoverable volume per workout and and three times a
week program is say three sets.
So if you know that you can do three sets and come back, come back 48 hours later and do three sets
and that's fine.
And you're just making good progress.
And then you introduce another set, you do four sets and that creates an extra day, maybe tips you
over or you do four or five sets and it tips you over to an extra day worth of recovery that you
need, but you're not getting.
You can basically numerically more or less just now add those numbers up as you go forward over time
and that'll be the number of days you need to then deload afterwards to get rid of that post work
appity up to a point.
Obviously get to 28 and you can kind of call it a day.
But so if like you're doing a four week block of training and you go from three sets to four sets,
you've now got 3 workouts per week with one extra day per workout.
Now that's 12 days worth of post work appity you need to recover from when you finish that block of
training.
So if you do 4 weeks with an extra block, yeah, so you do a four week block with an extra set per
workout, you know, you're getting an extra extra 2 sets per workout.
You know, that tips you over to an extra day per workout that you're not taking.
You can now add that on to your total time at the end of the, you know, kind of training program and
say, you know, this would work better actually if you want to do mathematically better every other
day because technically we are getting an extra rest day when we're doing 3 * a week.
But you're basically you're getting you.
You could do the calculation both ways.
I mean you would just add 2 days then a week.
Yeah, you just add two days a week really you kind of accumulating 2 per week.
So you get to the end of your, that's eight days.
So it's just a little bit over a week.
Now, if you start going crazy and start adding more and you start, you're going to need to, you're
going to find that you very quickly need 2 weeks or three weeks or whatever to recover from each the
time you do that.
And some of the training programs I've seen where they're doing really high volumes, they're going
to need the full 4 weeks and they never, never take them.
Let's.
Actually talk through this OK, because people probably packing themselves now being like, Oh my
gosh, what I do if I've been doing super high volume so.
Well, yeah, you can't get beyond that that month though.
So if you just drop incidentally.
Take a month off so we need to give them.
Some advice.
That's what I was going to answer.
That was what I was going to answer when I said that if in doubt, drop back to a maintenance level
program.
Now you've got two options here.
You can either, if you feel that the problem is not horrendous, you can just drop back to A three
times a week, either AB split, full body AB, or full body A.
And you can do a single set three times a week for your chosen exercises and just do that.
If you're really worried, do 2 * a week, yeah?
Yeah.
So let's talk through that.
So we know once or twice a week even with reps in reserve is going to cause net growth.
So you're saying that you could drop right back to one set twice a week where you know that you're
recovering.
And So what you're going to do, you're still going to be causing some damage from that workout, but
you're causing such a small amount of damage with a long enough recovery time that you actually So
what, like biking into that excess recovery load that you've got?
And so you're actually reducing that, not as quickly as you would if you weren't doing anything, but
you're working through it over the next few weeks.
Yeah.
Yeah.
So as I say, if I was not particularly worried, if I just thought I'd pushed it too hard, I would
drop back to single sets three times a week.
If I was actually very worried, I thought, well, not very worried, but if I knew I'd done it and it
was very pronounced and I would go to two times a week, you know, but ultimately, you know, that
would be far better than just taking a month off.
I would never take a month off.
I think that would make any sense.
It's a very interesting concept because you do see even in the silver era, they used to talk a lot
about in a lead up to those competitions that would be doing high volumes, using the the high volume
more as a cardio.
And then it was pretty common to talk about taking one way, two weeks, sometimes even longer than
that off after the competition.
You know, they'll obviously identify whether they consciously knew what was happening or not in
terms of of damage accumulation or whatever, but they obviously knew that there was some benefit to
taking their time off.
And then even more recently, you know, that's a common even in, you know, undulating periodization
in the Polk and world, there's a lot of people who would talk about taking a week off each block.
So you would do multiple phases back-to-back then at the end of say 12 weeks or 16 weeks, you would
take an entire week off and just recover.
In an ideal world, you just wouldn't need to do that.
In an ideal world, your programming volume that you know is recoverable and you're not accumulating
volume.
And even if you like in those scenarios this gave you're potentially accumulating so much volume,
then that week isn't just simply not going to do it.
So that's probably not the solution there.
That's my concern.
I think it would be best if people would just do the calculation.
If, if, if people are doing a program where they're, they're building up to really high levels of
volume and then they're taking a week off and they just magically think this week is going to kind
of fix all of the things that they've been doing wrong.
It's not emotional.
Situation.
It's not a one-size-fits-all.
It's not a one-size-fits-all.
You need to look at it and you need to go, how much over my recovery have I gone and how many times
have I done that, You know, and you just keep adding numbers up until you get to about 28.
And if you go to 28, you kind of you're going to need 4 weeks and after that it's four weeks.
It's just not going to get any bigger than that.
And realistically, practically speaking, I'd say most people listen to this as they have been
equally fatigue.
They're either going to be in that 28 day boat because they've just been doing it forever and
they'll end this hardly any point in me calculating it.
Just if you know you've been over the volume for, you know, as long as you can remember, just work
off 28 or they've just been doing it probably as like a structured kind of periodization within a
phase and then they should be able to calculate that relatively easily based off the last few weeks.
Yeah.
And I think it's interesting that this actually feeds into another anecdotal observation that people
make, because I would say that I get messages from people and the majority of them who are
describing their own personal experiences, they'll message me saying, thanks for, you know, pushing
this more low volume approach to strength training.
I've started doing it and I've had really great results.
Thank you.
And you get the same kind of messages.
I mean, it's like, you know, is everybody saying, you know, but there is a minority of people who
say, you know, I switched from my high volume training program and I I started doing what you
recommend and I gave up after three or four weeks because it wasn't working.
And I looked like I was really small in the mirror.
I'm like, well, there's two things going on here.
Firstly, you're not going to see any gains if you're in that kind of recovery phase because you're
still dealing with all the fatigue that you've accumulated that's stopping you from actually
stimulating any results.
Secondly, your muscle swelling has just completely evaporated.
You've just lost all your interest.
Do you know what on that point, the more common feedback I hear in in that category is actually
people saying I've swapped over to this.
I've got stronger, but I've lost almost stronger and.
I got smaller in the first month of doing.
It Well, you're telling me what the answer is already.
If you're telling me that you got stronger but you look smaller and.
You know, you don't see like you're making any new games.
It's like, well, that you've just told me what the the explanation is.
Yeah, and for anyone listening to this and says, well then I'll just keep doing the high volume and
stay swollen so I look more jacked.
That's a long time.
Exactly.
That's going to get you this far and then you're not going to progress any further beyond that.
Yeah, it's the same thing when I tried to explain to people how creatine works and they're like, you
know, Oh well if it makes me bigger, I'm going to keep doing it.
I'm like, it made you bigger once and it's a one time effect.
Yes.
But you have to keep doing it to stay that little bit bigger.
So it's like it's not going to, it's not going to, you know, kind of have any continued beneficial
effects.
It's just the one thing.
Is there anything else we need to say?
I, I, I'm just thinking it's true.
And I think hopefully that's given people enough to at least evaluate where they're at at this point
in time.
I, I would say one thing I find interesting about it is then thinking about how do you apply this to
programming?
So, you know, one way that I've sort of thought about this is, well, what can we do?
There's two things that come to mind for me.
So the first and most obvious 1 is, OK, well then like you mentioned before, let's just back off
volume one level below what we think the limit is.
And so A, that should mean that we're not going to be accumulating fatigue.
And B, it should mean that if someone is joining that or starting to do that and they have had
accumulated fatigue over time, they're just going to chip away that accumulated fatigue because we
programmed them below that level.
That's kind of what I tend to prefer to do.
The other way would be ramping up volume three out of phase, not to the point that you're trying to
get to overreaching or whatever, but to the point that you're starting off with lower volume over
the first couple of weeks that's still above maintenance or app maintenance, but then using that as
an opportunity to allow any fatigue to dissipate that may have occurred.
Yeah.
I mean, you know, I think the Physiology supports a number of programming strategies.
You know, I think the first thing you point to that is, is probably my preferred way of doing it is
to kind of just like just give your volumes a haircut, just take, take the top sort of level off and
don't, don't go into that zone.
And I mean, you know, when we're looking at fatigue and recovery data, we are always using moderate
loads of, you know, kind of to failure with stretch, not always all the way to failure, but many of
the sets taken to failure with, you know, kind of stretch position exercises.
So, you know, use some heavier loading, use lever up and reserve, don't always do stretch position
exercises.
And you might find that you can actually push into that four or five set territory and still
recover.
You might, I don't know.
I mean, it's going to vary.
I mean, I mentioned, you know, my own experience being older is that you, you do find that recovery
is slow.
And that's something we're probably going to follow up with a podcast on next week is talk about,
you know, the the effects of old training in older people and why it's actually an interesting
problem to look at.
And this conversation today will feature heavily in that in that podcast because it's going to all
be about that recovery issue.
So, you know, my preference is just to go down that route of just sort of sub dialing it back a
little bit and avoiding that danger zone.
Yeah, where super spawn of tea is going away.
One final point I want to make from a practical standpoint is and this I've changed my opinion on
this over the last couple years because of these conversations of accumulating fatigue.
So I had a client who would go away on a holiday, something like that.
Typically what I used to do was try to find what's the best, what's the, how can we replicate what
they have been doing as well as possible.
Yes, OK.
What equipment you have access to?
OK, we're going to change exercises.
We're going to use the dumbbells you can do, we're going to use isometrics, whatever.
And we'll try to get those, you know, 3 sessions in a week for the two weeks away.
Whatever.
Now what I do is I will see, is there a way that I can program you enough?
That's going to be maintenance, but I'll actually let you go all the way back to maintenance.
So if there was any fatigue accumulated, it's going to dissipate because you're not you're not going
to get as good a workout.
Yes, exactly.
We're just, we're being opportunistic.
That's all we're doing in that situation.
Yeah.
And for me as well, like I do that too.
And I love it because I go away and it's like I don't even need to think about the gym for, you
know, for me, I do five days.
Yeah, I'll do one workout every five days for body.
That'll be my maintenance workout.
And it's, you know, there's no sort of mental load of where am I going to find another gym, have to
worry about it, whatever.
It's a great opportunity just to even if you like, I love training, but even for me, it's just a
nice mental reprieve and there's no anxiety of Oh my God, I'm going to atrophy.
What's going to happen?
It's like, no, no, this is actually a potential benefit, you know, like it actually leave you.
Interesting.
It is interesting how people definitely think that I scaremonger regarding fatigue and atrophy.
It's, it's like, well, ultimately you, you've got to understand the nature of the problem before you
can, you know, present appropriate solutions to it.
Just denying the existence of the problem means that you don't know what mistakes you're making, you
know, so you have to understand the nature of the problem first, which is what I've been trying to
get people to do, understand the nature of the atrophy issue, understand the nature of the fatigue
issue.
And then once you've understood those things, there are hundreds of different ways that you can
program.
And as you've described, opportunistic situations you can take advantage of within that framework of
possibilities when you know where the barriers are to the to the problem.
You know, and as you said, one workout every five days or two workouts a week or however, however
you want to structure it, you know, it's absolutely fine for preventing atrophy from being an issue
and also to make sure that fatigue doesn't accumulate.
I mean, there's those, those kind of holiday or vacation situations are usable for that purpose.
I think, you know, it's a good a good way to see it.
OK guys, hopefully you've learned something there's even if you feel a little bit less anxious when
you go away because honestly, I don't know that you, Chris, I get messages like almost every day
being like, I'm going away for two weeks.
What do I do?
I'm feeling like honestly, I'm feeling anxious and I'm going to atrophy.
It's playing in my mind and hopefully this at least takes away a little bit of that anxiety if
nothing else.
Anyway, thank you for joining us all, and I do hope you'll join us again next week.