Episode: 021 Why Counting “Half Sets” for Secondary Muscles Doesn't Make Sense
URL: https://open.spotify.com/episode/24K18SizZzreau3KpaYOTs
Published: 2025-10-13
================================================================================

Welcome back everybody to another episode of Hypertrophy, past and present.
Chris, I'm not even going to bother asking how you are today because I know you're going to be a lot
better in about two minutes time because I finally are going to share a plan with you today that has
pull ups in it.
So, so don't get too excited just yet.
Just and I can see you jumping out of your skin.
Just wait.
So the plan I have today, I'll give you a moment.
Do you want to say anything before I jump into this?
I think I'm still recovering from the shock of hearing that we've got a program with pull ups in it,
but I'll let you explain it to us because I think it's going to be pretty interesting to hear that.
OK, OK, here we go.
So this is actually a plan from Dick Dubar.
Dubois.
I'm assuming Dubar.
I've not heard his name.
Well, I've heard some people say his name.
I've heard people say Dubois.
To me it's it looks like it would be Dubar.
I'm not sure, but he did win Mr. America in 1954, I believe, and then came second the following year
in the Mr. Universe.
Now, he's not someone who's talked about a whole lot, I guess, because he never won the Miss
Universe, but he does have a very aesthetic physique.
Looking at him for me, I'd say looking at a lot of the silvery guys, you kind of have those who like
people like Steve Reeves where there's kind of like more that athletic kind of look and and sort of
development across the body, like sort of more balanced development.
And he got read she's a little bit more pushing into that kind of mass sort of zone.
Dick Gibbard does look very sort of Steve Reeves esque in his physique.
So very well developed all over, but not overly not talked about a whole lot.
Now, this plan is a plan that he wrote in a magazine in 1954, so the year that he won the Mr.
America, so presumably similar to the plan he would've been following for that competition.
And as is obviously quite common, it is a full body at that point, almost everyone was using.
And something else I find interesting about this plan is it used 12 exercises, which if you guys,
you've listened to some of our episodes, you'll realize that that seems to be not necessarily like
the norm for everyone, but it's kind of the standard generally about that 12 exercises.
Yes, there's abbreviated plans and yes, there's some that are using, you know, 20 exercises or
whatnot, but the, the sort of norm for most will be 12 and then there's some variation.
So we've got 12 exercises full body three times a week.
And I'll just read out the exercises.
So we start with a behind the neck press, which obviously one of the most popular exercises in the
silver era.
Now, what's cool about this in in this magazine article, he did provide photos of how he was doing
these exercises.
So the behind the neck, we can see he actually had a fairly like close grip, A narrow grip for the
behind the neck.
Obviously you can't get, you know, too close when you're doing behind the neck.
But he did have in that bottom position his his hands were stacked over his elbows.
He wasn't sort of a wide grip at all.
So fairly closer grip behind the neck.
And then we went into a bench, although they called it a it's a pine press or whatever they called
it back there and then into dips.
So normal parallel bar dips into squats.
Now the squats or the the deep knee bend, they obviously they were performed differently at some
points and he was doing it sort of this old school way where he was up on his toes.
So his heels are actually suspended in the air.
They weren't they weren't elevated on a block or anything like that.
They were actually just up on on his toes.
And then he went into the bent arm pullover.
Obviously the squat pullover is a fairly popular combo there and then into an exercise I actually
haven't seen before in in a silver plan.
I think perhaps later on it got used a little bit, but he called it, I think he just called it a
modified dip.
Now essentially you'll have to use your imagination here for a moment.
So imagine you're doing a dip on parallel bars and instead of having your body vertical, you've
actually got your feet or your legs, I guess your feet are supported behind you and so your body is
actually horizontal.
So it's almost like a an inverted bench press type exercise.
I guess.
Imagine you're doing a push up in the air on dip bars.
So that was his modified dip into a barbell, curl into sit ups and then leg raise.
But this is lying on the floor leg raise.
So it wasn't like a hanging, hanging leg raise.
And then he did alternating dumbbell shoulder press.
Now this was done with a closer grip.
So we've got the behind the neck, which obviously was in the frontal plane and then this not full
schedule plane, but this kind of halfway sort of overhead press.
So alternating dumbbell and then into this is quite interesting too.
A standing calf phrasing had a very preliminary kind of rudimentary machine here where it was hard
to get the full sort of perspective.
But it looked like I don't know if he was hanging the weights off his his, his neck or his waist or,
or what be sort of had some kind of setup where he was able to have all these weights dangling off
him and like not holding them, but they were kind of on his person.
And he was doing this standing calf raise.
But it looked very much like a like the action of a normal standing calf raise machine.
And then he concluded with here we go, the wide grip chin behind the neck.
What do you make of all of that?
Well, sorry before you do.
You didn't you didn't give us some repetition reps and things like that, did you?
3 by 10 for all of it except for the squats.
He did go up to 15.
OK.
So some, some chunky volume then for that work out.
OK.
So I was very interested by the first part to that work out behind the neck press with a relatively
narrow grip, followed by the bench press, followed by the dip that for me, that three kind of that
that selection of three pressing exercises.
But then if you want to add on then the the kind of the more sagittal plane dumbbell press at the
end as well that that combination is fantastic.
I think that's really, really interesting with the narrower grip on the on the frontal plane
movement, he's going to get obviously really, really low with the with the start of that shoulder
movement.
So he's going to get some real emphasis on the middle belt, which is precisely the point of doing
that exercise in the 1st place.
That is a really nice touch.
I think it shows the intuition that they had for the excise selection, you know, kind of making sure
that they got the targeted muscle working in the exercise they were using.
It'd be interesting to know really if the dumbbell version was slightly higher up in the range of
motion, whether they avoid too low because that would then give you the opposite sort of side
effects that would be more anterior dealt focused by the upper part of the range of motion.
But you know, fantastic kind of illustration of how they were able to, you know, kind of intuit that
these muscles were being used are primarily targeted by these multi toned exercises.
But yeah, the collection of those exercises is fantastic because you got the middle delt targeted by
the behind the neck overhead press with especially with that narrower grip, obviously bench press
kind of much more chest focus.
I guess we should mention we don't always see bench presses in these programs, but maybe this is
slightly later on in the in the kind of the silver era pretty much at the end really.
So makes sense that we might start to see that.
But yeah, more of a chest focus.
And then you've also got the dips, which is much more triceps focused and then the the dumbbell in
the size of the plane, which is much more anterior adult focus.
So you can kind of see that they've got this selection of exercises, which is doing pretty much all
of our pressing muscles.
Interesting that he's still doing three sets of all of that.
I think that's probably off the end of what I would say is recoverable, but you know, I.
Believe in the article.
I believe he does very clearly specify that hey, this is pretty advanced and that a lot of people
won't be able to do this much volume.
I think that's probably fair.
You know, I would probably say that if you're going to do all four of those exercises in a single
workout, I'd probably do single sets.
For me, that would be much more realistic.
But anyway, so but just from a excise selection of you know, kind of standpoint, I really like that
collection.
I think that's a really nice selection.
Modified or inverted dip.
Well, he's kind of doing a bench press, isn't he really?
What's interesting, the image when you look at that, it looked like his hands were a little bit
closer together for starters, which I guess they kind of would be with a dip sort of position
anyway.
So it'd be almost like a close grip bench, but not only is it a close grip bench, but he was
actually getting incredibly deep, so deeper than you would in a.
So one day, you know, obviously you participate.
So again, ranges of motion are different and so you're going to see different leverages.
And again, so he's looking for ways to, you know, train movement, similar movements, but in this
case in different ranges of motion.
So yeah, no interesting again because you know, he's finding finding potentially different regional
variances in which muscles are being trained.
In terms of the other sections of the workout.
I'm trying to remember how whether there was anything else.
I don't think there was anything else.
There was a pulling exercise, literally just the pull up is.
That it wasn't.
No, it was just actually the.
Yeah, and.
I don't remember you saying any curls either.
No, there were curls and many.
Curls.
I missed that.
I missed the curls.
Yes, I missed the curls.
2 steps.
OK.
So, so that makes a little bit more sense.
Now obviously with the wide grip pull up, he's going pure frontal plane.
He's really trying to maximize that by doing them behind the neck.
So very, very big focus on the lower regions of the lat.
But again, we're not seeing anything to target the upper part of the lat.
I don't think there's any trap work in there, don't think there's any anything else.
And actually by doing the Y grip pull up, he's probably missing some rear delt as well because
you're not getting that narrow grip that you would need really to maximize the posterior delt sort
of situation.
So definitely see some holes in the program, but at the same time you can see some insights into,
you know, the excise selections that he's using.
It looks to me like he definitely was focusing quite heavily on the pressing muscles.
And at this point in his career, pulling muscles really just weren't a priority for him.
He'd already kind of done that bit and it wasn't really moving any further forwards.
So you know, it probably reflects what he was working on rather than really truly balanced program
in that particular in that.
Yeah, I agree.
There's definitely a lot of a lot of, I mean the fact that he's got two different types of dips in
there.
Often we don't see any dips and two different dips, two different over the head pressing the
alternating dumbbell shoulder press.
I'm asking about that because obviously.
Ironically, it actually looks like a program that I would need if I wanted to be fix, fix my
physique deficits.
Like, yeah, it would be like some, well, the dips, probably not, but in terms of the pressing stuff,
it would be what I would probably have to go towards because polling stuff, no problem at all.
But yeah, I think that that's the point, isn't it?
It's like when these guys get to that level, they're looking for those those solutions to problems
that they maybe have inadvertently.
To win them with competition.
Exactly.
So they're looking to fix deficits, you know.
But yes, it definitely doesn't look like a purely fully balanced program.
The alternating dumbbell shoulder.
So obviously he did do this a little bit, you know, more sagittal plan.
But this is an exercise that you do see quite a lot of in some of these old plans and it's not
something that people particularly do today.
Do you have any thoughts on it?
In more sense, in the sense that it's not used today because there are reasons for it or.
Well, the fact that most of the time people were doing this alternating and today obviously
everyone's doing whatever you would call not alternating this normal bilateral.
And to me, it kind of makes sense to potentially do it alternating.
And sometimes they would even do a single arm.
So people like Greg would often do a single arm and he would trace himself with his other side and
just perform one arm at a time.
And it takes a little bit of getting used to, but once you do, it does feel quite good as an
exercise.
And to me, it seems like, you know, obviously we do things like alternating dumbbell curls, and
that's very common.
But this is for some reason people don't do alternating over their press anymore, at least not in
the world that I am part of.
I just want to be missing out potentially.
Could this be potentially A worthwhile inclusion?
I think it depends on what equipment you've got available to you.
I mean, interestingly in the gyms that I've been going to in the last couple of years, I've actually
always had access to a fairly narrow grip overhead press as well as a fairly in front of the body as
I like a machine as well as the standard more kind of wide grip ones.
So I've actually been quite lucky in that respect that there's always been a machine available to do
both of those types of overhead press.
But I think yes, if people don't have access to them.
And I think it probably makes sense to consider a dumbbell variation, especially if you've got a a
bench that you can set up to create a backrest and that was proper seated or slight incline perhaps
sort of overhead press environment.
And yeah, I mean, that idea of minimizing the total amount of muscle mass working at any one period
of time is pretty cool because you are going to get high levels of recruitment and delt obviously is
pretty chunky muscles.
So you're going to have a voluntary activation deficit there.
So, yeah, I mean, if you've got the ability to set up and use, you know, kind of a stable
environment, either one arm at a time with a brace or whether you can get a stable situation in a in
a seated position and do those alternating.
No, I think that's a really interesting idea.
I think, I mean, I, I went through a kind of a period of time when I wanted to really emphasize the
benefits of machines because of the stability and the, the kind of the, the advantages that that
gives you equally, you know, now, I think it's also valuable to now that we've kind of had that
period of time in the fitness industry and people have realized that that's the case and there's
reasons for it or a very good reason for it.
It's also useful to come back like you were saying, I think in one of the recent podcasts, as you
were joking before the podcast, I can literally not remember anything that happened in any of the
prior podcasts at all.
But I do remember that you were talking about the benefits of free weights.
You know, and I think one of the benefits that you highlighted previously is this idea that, you
know, especially something like a squat, you are putting the entire body under a lot of load and
you're going to get muscles growing that you just aren't going to train in any other scenario, which
is kind of why people talk about the squat as a mass builder.
It's because it's not just growing your quads.
You're actually just loading the entire body, you know, and there's going to be a lot of stabilizers
working in that situation.
I think there's an interesting comment to be made here, which is that, you know, if you are working
out in a gym almost anywhere in the world, apart from, you know, kind of the really expensive part
of, you know, big cities where they've got like a million machines that you can do anything with.
You know, if you're living in a normal part of the world, then you're probably going to find that
there is a flexibility and a versatility associated with having some dumbbells on the bench that
you're not going to get from just the machines that you've got available to you.
And I think that's an important recognition.
And I think it's useful to just make that observation and say, look, you know, something like a
seated dumbbell press alternating in the sagittal plane where you've got, you know, OK, you're
losing a bit on the stability side, but you are gaining a lot in terms of the reduced amount of
muscle mass and the focus on the anterior delt that you can get by using that plane of motion.
So, you know, I think again, it's it's about fine.
We've had the period of time when we've, you know, kind of pointed at machines and told people where
they're great.
Now we can kind of like keep that and also recognize the advantages of free weights in certain
situations for other reasons that, you know, maybe just practical really, but you know, it's still
still important for a lot of people.
Yeah, absolutely.
Yeah.
And some machines, what I like about some machines is you might be able to say even an overhead
press machine that might have wide handles, might have closer handles and you might be able to do,
you know, several variants on a single machine.
And from a time standpoint, convenience standpoint, that can be amazing.
And then other machines you're locked into just, you know, one sort of handle width, whatever.
And if you want to do some more variations, you have to set up a whole nother machine.
And it's sometimes you can just be more far more efficient to use dumbbells or use a barbell.
Use a Smith machine and you can in one station you can do you know 3 or 4 different variants quite
easily.
Totally.
And again, that's going to vary according to people's situations.
As everyone who follows me knows, I do tend to travel a bit.
And so, you know, I kind of have very different experiences in in gyms in different parts of the
world.
And sometimes I can be in a situation where I can reliably go to a gym at a certain time of day and
be reasonably confident that there's not going to be that many people there.
So I kind of just kind of wander around to whichever machine I want to according to my schedule and
do the exercise I want to do.
But the opposite is also the case.
Sometimes I'm in scenarios where I have to kind of even queue to get to a machine.
And then as you point out, you kind of want to just do everything you possibly can on that machine
before you get like evicted, you know.
So it's again, it's like the pressures or the the requirements of the situation you find yourself in
are going to play a role.
And again, it comes down to what what the circumstances are.
And I think again, recognizing that there are possibilities available to us.
So like, yeah, if you can get a bench set up so that you can stabilize yourself in a seated overhead
press situation and you've got the dumbbells, you can just go ahead and do 2 variations.
You can do your wide grip variation for the metal delt and you can do your A size to plane narrow
grip variation for your anterior delt, changing the ranges of motion a little bit to maximize those
loadings or, or emphasis.
And that's a fantastic opportunity in the situation where you've perhaps got limited access to a
company you've had to fight to get your hands on that, that bit of a equipment that you've got.
So yeah, I think again, practice.
You know what, you don't even need to change a dumbbell.
It's like something I programmed quite a lot will be if there's two exercise variants that there
might be a difference in strength in those exercises, but not significantly.
So then, then I would just say, yeah, just pick the stronger exercise, go 1st, and then just unwrap
on that second set.
Yeah, yeah, No, totally.
Again, you know, for people who are listening to this and thinking, Oh my word, what are they
saying?
We're describing practical responses to specific situations.
You know, sure.
You know, if you've got access to, you know, multi $1,000,000 gym, you know, in a big city with all
these amazing machines, then just feel feel free to disregard everything that we're saying at the
moment.
But you know, the point that we're making is that it's about maximizing the equipment that's
available to you to get the best possible result with the physiological framework that we're
describing.
Now for people looking at this plan, they might say, OK, behind the neck.
So you said that's pretty good for middle delt, but obviously you're going to be getting some
anterior delt in that exercise as well.
And you know, bench, well, obviously that's, you know, maybe going to be a little bit more chest,
but what you might get a little bit of triceps might get a little bit of anterior delt.
And there's a common, I guess belief or practice where people would look at something like a bench
and say, well, you might say that's going to be, let's say, one set worth for your chest.
And maybe it's going to be half a set of a stimulus for your triceps.
So half a set for your entry delts or whatever.
You know, maybe for one person, maybe the triceps will get one set and the chest will get half a
set.
And that's something we wanted to talk about today, isn't it?
Yeah.
So though you've kind of encapsulated everything in one kind of paragraph there.
Yeah.
So basically the two the two kind of related ideas that we wanted to address here is like, you know,
if you are writing a training program or doing a training program and you've got a multi joint
exercise in it and you are perhaps able to identify that, you know, maybe you know, this exercise
has one muscle as the as the kind of limiting factor and then obviously uses a whole bunch of other
muscles.
How do you count the stimulus that you're getting for the secondary muscles, the muscles that aren't
the limiting factor?
So just let me define a couple of terms here and defend the way I'm describing this.
So I'm using the word limiting factor.
Now, the word phrase limiting factor here, what I'm saying is that that's basically the muscle
that's going to get maxed out in terms of its recruitment.
You know, and it's going to be the one that is kind of ultimately responsible for the amount of
weight you can lift in that exercise.
Everything else is probably going to be at a sub maximum level of recruitment in that situation.
Now what I'm not doing is using the words prime mover.
And the reason I'm doing that is because prime mover has meanings in bio mechanics which don't fully
overlap with limiting factor.
Often they do, but they're not perfect.
So I'm just going to not use that terminology and I'm just going to stick with the terminology
limiting factor.
Because ultimately what I'm saying is that that's the muscle that is maxed out in terms of
recruitment.
Now, you can get other muscles that are maxed out in terms of recruitment if they're a lot smaller.
So for example, if you're doing a sagittal plane pulling motion, you're going to find the posterior
delt is probably pretty much maxed out.
But generally speaking, we would regard the upper lat as being the prime.
Again, mixing terminologies, a limiting factor.
Ultimately you could argue the posterior delt is sitting alongside that, which is totally fine as
well.
But ultimately, you know, what we're interested in here is what is the what is the muscle that is
responsible for the performance of that exercise?
And as a result, it's going to be pretty much maxed out in terms of motor unit equipment in the most
difficult reps of that set or the most difficult Rep of that set.
So if we've identified what are limiting factors, then we've obviously going to have a bunch of
other muscles that are working, you know, and they're going to have lower levels of motor unit
equipment.
And really that is the framework that, you know, is, is the one that we're using.
And what that means is that some muscles are going to be trained with every single fibre that you've
got access to, most fibres you access to and other muscles are going to be trained without the
maximum number of fibres that you've got access to.
So you're essentially training some fibres, not, not others.
And so straight away you can see that the idea of saying that, you know, there's a half set worth of
stimulus for a secondary muscle is pretty silly because ultimately it's not about the stimulus
that's being received by the working fibers.
The magnitude of the stimulus being received by the working fibers is identical.
It's just that you're not actually training as many muscle fibers.
So for example, if you were to have to look at the bench press example, let's say we're doing a
bench press and the person is using the PEC as their limiting factor, anterior deltas kind of
contributing a lot, but it's not maxing out.
And the triceps are contributing a lot, but they're not maxing out.
If you look at the stimulus that the working fibres are receiving in the pack, they're exactly the
same stimulus as the working fibres are receiving in the triceps or the working fibres are receiving
the anterior delt.
Any working fibres are going to get the same stimulus more or less.
But you've got a whole chunk of fibres in the anterior delt and in the triceps that are just simply
not being activated and not getting any kind of stimulus at all.
And so they're literally, it's as if they weren't even exercising.
And I think the problem is when people start talking about half set, it's worth half a set.
They think that if you did 2 sets, you get the same stimulus as doing a triceps exercise or an
anterior delta exercise.
And it's just not because you're not actually working any of the fibers at the top end of the mote
unit pool in those muscles in that multi joint excise situation.
So it's literally impossible to do what people think you can do, which is to say, well, you know, I
get, you know, I do three sets of bench and therefore I'm getting half a set.
That's 1 1/2 sets worth of stimulus for my triceps.
I can now say that that no, you can't.
Doesn't work like that.
Hypertrophy is muscle fibers specific.
So if you don't Max out recruitment, then there's going to be fibers at the top of the Motina
pulling out training.
And that means you're not going to be capable of continuing to allow those fibers to go.
This is the whole thing that people got really aggravated about.
I think it was earlier this year, maybe six months ago, people were saying, oh, well, you know, I
can do this exercise which kind of uses this muscle and it's just going to keep the muscle kind of,
you know, ticking over.
It's not going to atrophy until my next workout.
Like this Bruce pet idea where you can say, oh, well, I'm going to do a triceps day on Friday.
So if I do some bench and I'm not a triceps venture, I'm like a much more of a Peck or anterior
dominant, anterior adult dominant bencher.
And we say, well, I'm doing do some bench and that will keep my triceps ticking over until Friday.
So, well, yes, for the fibers that work, not for the fibers that don't work.
So fundamentally the idea that you can sort of say that a secondary muscle or a muscle that's not a
limiting factor is kind of either just being ticked over by a exercise in which it's not a limiting
factor or it's it's kind of getting half a set or something like that is, is an absolute nonsense.
It just doesn't work physiologically.
And it's just people who are looking at this from a yeah, we're training the muscle.
Therefore, if I do this and it gets this stimulate, no, muscles don't receive stimuli.
Muscle fibers receive stimuli and you either train the muscle fibre or you don't.
So just kind of from the very get go, I'm coming out strong against this and saying it just doesn't
work as a concept.
And I know that it gets used in metro analysis and things, but it's just not valid.
So if you don't look at it as say you took a beginner and you took an advanced lifter and you've got
an exercise like the bench you've used as an example.
So you might have the beginner where they haven't hypertrophied basically anything in the triceps or
the, the delts or the the chest beyond kind of what they would hypertrophy just from normal life
activities, right?
And so they're benching even if they are, let's say a chest dominant bencher.
Well, because you've got all these muscle fibers in the triceps and adults that have not
hypertrophied, they're still going to get a net gross stimulus from the exercise.
Yeah.
Yeah.
So if you were to grade this phenomenon across beginners and two minutes in a month, what you'd find
is that the more advanced you are, the more plateau you have in the fibers higher up the mote unit
pool.
So as we as we have go through our training career, what happens is that fibers lower down the motor
unit pool start to hit that plateaus because they are, you know, kind of being trapped smaller sizes
in accordance with the size principle of striated muscle.
So the lower down the motor unit pool you are the more oxide to fiber, the more they're likely to
get trapped to the smaller size.
So as you progress towards, you know, kind of intermediate and then finally advanced, you're going
to be in a situation where more of your fibers are essentially plateaued.
And the only fibers remaining to you that can grow are those of the highest threshold motor units
and the fastest fiber types, the most glycolytic and the most capable of growing to the biggest
possible sizes.
So yeah, absolutely.
If you have a beginner who just starts bench pressing, then everything is going to grow because
you've got such capacity for growth all the way down the bottom end of the motor unit pool, right?
The way to the lowest high threshold motor units.
As soon as you've got any kind of growth though, you're going to start to find those fibers at the
bottom end of the motor unit pool starts to Max out.
And then basically you're going to find that your secondary muscles that are not the limiting
factors are just going to be kind of hovering around the place where you're sort of motor unit
equipment levels are maxing out in that exercise for those muscles.
So let's say you get your chest to it, like sort of it's 100%, which is not true 100%, but let's
see, it might be 95 or something like that.
Let's say it's your 100% for the ones you got access to, but your delts are down at 80 and your
triceps are down at 70.
What you might find is that gradually as a beginner, if all you're doing for pressing is just bench
press, which is actually not an unreasonable situation to imagine for a lot of people.
But if that's kind of all the pressing that you're doing, what you might find is that you kind of
get your triceps to 70% and then that starts to pretty much stop you from growing any further
because you're not training anything above that.
And then, yeah, the delts kind of get stuck 80%.
You don't get any further than that in terms of the growth.
If you want to take growth forward in that particular intermediate lifter, you would have to turn
around and say, well, OK, we need to put in that sort of alternating dumbbell press that we were
talking about earlier in the size to plane for anterior delts.
Maybe we have to start putting dips in for the triceps or whatever.
And then you'd start to see some progress on on top of that kind of progress that had previously
been made.
So yeah, absolutely training status is going to play a pretty big role in that particular situation.
Yeah.
So in that example we just gave there, so the so the beginner would theoretically get good growth in
each of those muscles and then the intermediate most likely in two of those.
And then as someone becomes advanced, most likely just one of those is going to get a growth
stimulus.
Now you get a couple of options there where they're now using different exercises.
But in that example, you could say, well, what if they now use, say, closer grip on the bench?
And if the triceps weren't as involved previously, now they're going to be more involved in a closer
grip.
So you could actually level out the recruitment across those muscles a bit.
Yeah.
So you could absolutely start doing what we were talking about earlier, which is where you kind of
you set up on the excise station, you do a couple of variations, different variations while you're
in the same location.
Like you know, you do a wide grip bench and then you do a narrow grip bench or whatever.
Interestingly though, so this kind of segues into just kind of establishing what the person's
leverages are.
So I think we mentioned recently that if you're thinking about wanted joint exercises, you can kind
of classify them into those that, you know, generally speaking, you're going to have the same
limiting factor for everybody most of the time, like Hippocrates and stuff like that.
And then there's going to be other exercises like bench presses, which are just like the opposite
end of the spectrum, which is it's just complete and utter, you know, kind of randomness whether
somebody is Peck dominant.
Why?
It's not random, but it can feel random whether somebody's Peck dominant, anterior dominant, or
triceps dominant.
It can really vary a lot.
Now the important thing is though, that whatever dominance you start out with is going to start
getting worse or more impactful over time.
And that's because of the way neuromechanical matching works.
So if you pick the bench press example and the person is literally say they're just doing like a
powerlifting type program, they're doing sort of squat, bench, deadlift, and they start to do their
bench press in the same way every time and they get stronger.
And as we were talking about earlier, maybe they're at 100% of their maximum from sort of
recruitment, voluntary recruitment for the packs, maybe something like 80% for the adults and 70%
for the triceps or whatever the numbers were.
I can't remember.
I can't remember what we said in this podcast now.
It's like my memory is deteriorating to the point where I can't remember what I said 5 minutes ago.
The issue then is if that person has been lifting with that proportion to start with, what's going
to happen is that the PEC will grow to a greater extent than the triceps and the anterior dose.
Even though we're getting growth across all three muscles in that beginner, you are still going to
see more growth in the PEC because more fibers are being used.
So it's just a number of fibers question.
And so more fibers grow and that means that the PEC now increases its internal momentum to a greater
extent than the other muscles.
And that means that gradually the brain starts to recognize that it has better leverage in the PEC
than it does in the other muscles.
And it starts to give you an even more skewed balance towards the PEC and away from the other
muscles.
So your Y grip bench that was originally PEC dominant becomes more PEC dominant over time simply
because of the way neuro mechanical matching works and the fact that a bigger muscle has a bigger
leverage.
So you become more PEC dominant and then you're going to take that with you into other exercise
variations.
So if you leave it too long, you can find actually that you trap your wrap yourself in a situation
where single joint exercises are probably going to be your best way of fixing the problem.
Because if you kind of get to a point where you've been doing wide grip bench for like a year and a
half and then you decide you're going to start doing other bench pressing variations.
You're probably still going to find that your PEC has so much better leverage than everything else
that it probably carries over into some of those other like narrow grip benching and other
situations as well.
So either if you're going to use the excise variation variety way within within a single exercise
category, I'll probably start earlier rather than later.
Otherwise, no problem at all.
You just go and do single joint stuff.
So you do or different exercise variation like you just take the PEC out completely by doing an
overhead press.
So there's Ways and Means of doing that.
I think just recognizing that time actually does influence what your options are for messing around
with that kind.
Of well, there's two ways of looking at that as well.
So you know, the example I gave the movie to like a close grip bench to prioritize a little bit more
triceps since that's what's getting the lease activation in that version for that person.
Well, the other ways you could say, well, if this is more chess dominant for me anyway, I can
actually lean into using it as a chess exercise.
And so we'll actually use it as a wide grip edge.
And and then and that's probably what I do more of when I'm programming is how do I turn this
compound lift of this multi joint lift into variation where I know we're just going to smash one
particular muscle or gradient?
And I think that's definitely a good strategy for advanced lifters.
I would definitely lean into that because it gives you so many more options.
You know, you can like, I'm going to use that for that purpose and I'm going to lean that direction
for this purpose.
And you start to polarize exercises quite a lot by the variation that you've you've chosen to use.
And I think that's really, really strong strategy in that advanced lifter category.
I think for beginners, you know, depending on whether obviously this kind of raises another
question, which is to say, when is this a problem?
When is this not a problem?
And that's kind of the point that I raised a minute ago when I said, you know, you can kind of
categorize exercises into being those that are going to have the same limiting factor for most
people most of the time.
And those that are just not, you know, and the best examples, I would say, you know, something like
a hip thrust is, is never going to be anything other than a glute exercise and probably never going
to be anything other than a lower glute exercise for for the vast, vast, vast majority of people.
And a number of people who who are not going to have the lower glute being the immunity factors, who
can be vanishingly tiny.
And I think I've met one or two of them.
But, you know, I think they do exist.
But it's like, you know, most people, most of the time, it's just not going to be even a question.
In contrast to bench press, I think is absolutely a free for all.
It's just one of those exercises that has such similar contributions between the prime movers that,
you know, different people's leverages can nudge you in different directions.
And I've said before that I'm one of the extreme examples of being extremely dominant in any
pressing motion, but the bench press is particularly obvious.
I mean, it's actually funny how much my bench press weight changes when I start changing grip with
it just drops off the, you know, it just drops off ridiculously as I start to go wider.
So, you know, I think those those things can be very, very noticeable, you know, and so we kind of
have to start by saying, you know, which exercise is going to fall into which category.
Now in the category of exercises that is always going to have the same limiting factor, you can kind
of just program those.
However, for anybody in any scenario.
I mean, I think I've said before, they're great exercises to identify, to use in Group programs.
If you're writing a program for a group people absolutely amazing because you just know.
Now that doesn't mean that you can't do the same thing with the exercises that are more kind of
variable, but you do what you pointed out a minute ago, which is can we steer them so that we can
mostly guarantee the result we're getting that way.
You know, as I like, if I go for a really wide grip bench press, then I can start to really be
confident that I'm not going to have a triceps involvement in that exercise to the same extent as I
would do.
I'm not never going to have that as limiting factor, for example.
Yes.
If I then change the range of motion, I can push it towards being either a PEC or an anterior delt
dominance.
So if I use top kind of contract position partial, that's going to be an anterior delt.
If I use a lengthen partial, it's going to be a PEC variation.
So you can start with an exercise that on paper initially will be a variable 1 and you can convert
it into a non variable one or a mostly non variable 1 by the, you know, the the variation, the
precise variation that you use.
So that would be like just thinking about things from a group level.
Then secondly, you can also, if you have a particular person, lift her in mind, you can actually
know what their leverages are and then you know kind of what you're doing.
Well, I mean, that's ultimately having all the information that you need.
Now, how you figure out what that leverages are as a separate question, but you know, useful ways of
just look at ratios of lifts.
So like I was describing a moment ago, I know what my leverages are in pressing motions because you
can literally just look at my lifts and see that my triceps dominant lifts are ridiculous.
Anything else that doesn't evolve the triceps so much are actually pretty funny how bad they are.
So, you know, really, really big differences are very, very noticeable.
So, you know, you can kind of figure out more or less what someone's leverages are to be.
You know, also you can look at how people perform lifts.
Like most people know that if they're watching someone do a squat and there's a lot more hip
dominance, you can see that.
And similarly, if someone's doing a squat in this morning, you can see that.
Same thing with deadlifts and things like that.
You know, you can often see those to some extent, but that's where you've got much more, much, much
more information operating.
Without that information, we're kind of saying, well, you know, we either have a group of exercises
which is already pretty fixed in terms of limiting factor.
And then we've got a group of exercises that is not fixed.
But maybe we can steer it according to the range of motion that we use or the plane of motion we use
or anything else that we might do to kind of push it in a particular direction.
Yeah, yeah.
I can't remember the last time for a non beginner that I programmed just like a standard bench or a
standard overhead press.
Like I would always say I want this to be wide grip, I want this to be close grip, schedule, plane,
whatever.
So I can guarantee.
And that's because I'm, I'm predominantly working with groups and it's so I can guarantee fairly
safely what that individual is actually going to get out of that exercise.
And for beginner, I don't mind so much.
You know, I'm happy just to say, OK, bench because like we established before, kind of everything is
going to grow at least to some extent to begin with.
But it's an interesting point in that so often I do see plans, and I'm sure you would too, where
someone just says the exercise, they just say bench, they just say overhead.
And it's like, well, OK, but you go tell two people to do an overhead press and one of them is going
to do a close grip mid group and one does a wide group.
And that's really actually significantly different what they're getting out of that exercise.
Absolutely.
So if you've got the variation at the individual level in terms of their leverages and then you've
also got the variation in terms of the way that they've elected to do the exercise.
Those two sources of variability straight away up, you know, pushing you into two totally different
training programs really.
So, you know, you've got, you know, just simply the way that the exercise is being done.
And secondly, the responses of that individual to that exercise.
And you just in a world of like, you know, two different, two different scenarios, two different
worlds according to the results of those training programs.
And it's on paper the same program, but the results are going to be completely different according
to the variability inherent in the exercise way of being performed and the variability of that
individual in terms of their leverages.
And I think, you know, it's, I mean this, this brings us to another point, which is that I think
there is a tendency because what we've just explained there is a strategy.
As someone becomes more advanced, we probably want to be being much more specific about what the
exercise is trying to achieve.
And then trying to make the exercise do that thing according to what we know about the leverages and
how they change with range of motion and plane of motion and all that kind of thing.
Positions approximal and distal joints, things like that, grip positions, those kind of thing.
Now some people I have started to kind of try and avoid the problem.
One of the questions I get often is like you've talked about how the upper lat is involved mainly in
sagittal plane and the lower latter is mainly involved in frontal plane.
And so you would always want two different pulling variations, 1 frontal, 1 sagittal.
You know, can I just do scapular plane and does that cover me for everything?
And it's like, well, yes and no.
So you need to understand that voluntary activation deficits are the reason that we talk about this
volunteer activation deficit is that you've got a limit on the number of muscle fibers or mote units
rather that you can recruit in a muscle according to the maximum tolerable protection of efforts.
So you produce a certain amount of centric command and it goes to the muscles that you're using for
the exercise.
And at a certain point you stop increasing the center motor command because you can't tolerate any
more effort perception.
And that effort perception maximum does not correspond to every single muscle fiber in the latch
being activated spontaneously.
It does not.
So you're going to have a bunch of muscle fibers that are not being used.
Which ones do you want them to be?
Pick which muscle fibers you don't want to activate.
Now, if you use a frontal plane, the muscle fibers that are not going to be activated, they're going
to be in the upper lat.
If you do a sighted plane, the most fibers that are going to not be used, Moat units that are not
going to be recruited are going to be located in the lower land.
If you do a scapular plane, it's going to be a mix of both.
You're going to be some from someplace and some from the other.
I don't know.
We don't have good leverage data for scapular plane that we do for frontal and sighted tool.
So, but it is probably going to be a mixture of both.
So you're going to have some motives there.
Now, the point I'm making here is that whichever one of these three examples that you pick, sorry,
strategies that you pick, whether you pick.
A wide grip pull down, or a narrow grip pull down, or a scapular plane pull down.
Whichever one of those you pick, you are always suffering the same issue.
You're always suffering a lack of some motions being recruited and some muscifiers being activated,
and those will not grow.
Whichever one of them you pick, you end up in the same place in terms of the total amount of muscle
mass that you're not training.
The point that I'm saying is if you just do a wide grip and a narrow grip, you are going to
basically get really nice overlap and you're going to capture pretty much the whole of the muscle.
You can't do that with scapula.
The scapula falls into the same category as just doing either wide grip or just doing narrow grip.
You still lose out.
It's just you're losing out different fibers.
So for people who think that they can go, Oh well, we'll just make the exercise kind of a hybrid of
the two variations that you've argued are useful.
You're still you're suffering the same problem as just doing one or the other.
You're not fixing the problem.
Yeah, I hope people follow that.
When you said, I forget the the words exactly you said.
But essentially what you're saying is both the options of the narrow grip and the wide grip, they're
doing one thing really well.
Yeah.
And the Capitane is doing two things not that well.
And the total number of muscle fibers that you're going to probably activate in each of those three
exercises is probably going to be similar.
So you're always going to have the same number of fibers that you're not training.
So what?
So, so the reality is, and this is interesting because the reality is you could argue then that the
scapula is not even very useful in a beginner situation.
You might as well just pick one or the other of the wide grip or the narrow grip because it's going
to get you to the same kind of place eventually in terms of total muscle mass.
And then later on you just add in the other one that you weren't doing or it was scapula.
If you do scapula as a beginner and like, oh, you know, I'm doing the generic one that's going to
get, no, not really, because it's going to get you to the same place more or less as the, as the
wide grip or the narrow gate in terms of total like muscle mass.
It's just that you're then going to have to learn 2 totally different exercises later on to replace
that one that you were doing previously.
I mean, that's a little bit of an oversimplification.
More or less the problem is similar that the deficit is going to be similar across the three
exercises.
Now, one question which is similar but different, but people can probably ensure the answer is if
you can't say, if it doesn't make sense to say 1, you know, set of benches is 1 set for chest and
half a set for triceps or whatever, Then the question becomes, well, how do I count it for, for
damage or for fatigue or whatever?
And, and that's often, yes, I hear people give as well as, oh, well, you count it as half a set
worth of damage for the triceps or whatever the muscle.
Now, in the example or in the, in the way you've explained it, where obviously we're talking about
the number of muscle fibers in that particular muscle.
That's that's, you know, experiencing a stimulus well, based on the fact that where it's going to be
the high threshold million, it's that are going to be left off.
Then if you have a muscle that has not low activation per SE, but relatively low compared to
whatever muscles being used in that exercise, well, that muscle ultimately is going to experience
very minimal damage then.
Yeah.
So the issue with damage is that it's very skewed towards the top end of the mote unit pool.
So you've got an exponentially greater problem with muscle damage the higher you go because you've
got more glycolytic fibers that are so much more susceptible to calcium and accumulation.
So ultimately I would say that, you know, the, the problem of muscle damage is probably smaller when
you're working with secondary muscles.
Ultimately you're not getting to really high levels of recruitment.
You're not going to get that high calcium and accumulation in susceptible fibers.
So, you know, ultimately, I think having A, and this is, this is really where you could push that
further by the strategy that you've been describing, which is where you, you really nudge and
exercise in the direction of which muscle that you want to target.
Because if you've got something like a, you know, sort of a really wide grip bench press or, you
know, like we're talking about earlier, the narrow grip behind the neck overhead press.
And you really try to push the exercise to be very good at one particular muscle kind of being a
limiting factor.
And a lot of the other muscles really down grading the motion recruitment levels.
That's going to really limit the amount of damage you get from the exercise on those other muscles.
And that then allows you to do what was being done in this program that you described today.
Remember the beginning of this podcast?
That's quite impressive.
My memory is going back to the suddenly.
So I actually remember that you.
Yeah, we had this collection of pressing exercises and, you know, if you can make these exercises
very, very kind of focused on one particular muscle, then you can start to increase the amount of
volume.
And that's what we saw in this program where you're getting three sets per exercise.
And it's like looking at that, it's like, wow, that's so much because, you know, you're training
these pressing muscles with like, you know, sort of four exercises and three sets.
That's like 12 sets in a workout.
That's monstrous.
But if you manage to really steer the exercise variation to focus almost exclusively on one
particular muscle where you're not getting high enough recruitment levels to see damage in those
other muscles, then it starts to make a little bit more sense.
So.
Yeah, I mean, exactly.
If you look at that workout plan, if we're talking behind the neck, overhead press and then say a
wide grip bench and then the dips, like it's feasible that even that bench, the triceps might not be
experiencing much damage.
No, not at all.
And the behind the neck, obviously you're going to get more middle doubt.
So yeah, it's that's what I find looking at a lot of these old plans, I do get a lot of criticism
from people being like, oh, there's so much pressing in some of these these plans, how could one
possibly recover?
And I'm thinking, well, presumably the person who's writing this plan, they know, whether they know
it consciously or not, that in those compound lifts they're predominantly getting X muscle and then
they're using another multi joint lift where they're getting the other muscle that's not getting
stimulated as much and that's ultimately answering the recovery question.
Yeah.
I mean, I think it is important to note that the the damage is definitely skewed towards the top end
of the motor unit pool.
So if we are dramatically reducing the level of recruitment in those secondary muscles, the problem
is going to be a lot smaller.
How much smaller and how much of an effect?
I think it's really going to be individual and how well you manage to skew the excise in the
direction you wanted to go.
But at the end of the day, the concept applies.
The principle applies, and we certainly can't do you know what we're what you mentioned, which is
like the idea of having half a set worth of damage or you know, the same way you can't have half a
set worth of stimulus.
It just the concept literally just doesn't work.
It's what we would say.
It is not a valid construct.
It violates the whole kind of basis of Physiology that sits underneath what we're talking about.
It doesn't make sense.
I mean, ultimately, none of these questions make sense if you just go back to starting with
everything's happening at a fiber level.
Well, yeah.
And I've argued before that if everybody would just remember that, then almost all of the problems
in in the hypertrophy kind of part of the fitness industry would disappear overnight.
Because ultimately whenever somebody's trying to convince you of something silly, generally
speaking, they are assuming that, you know, kind of is not muscle fibre specific.
And I mean, ultimately, that's the assumption behind the silly thing that they're proposing most of.
The time now, in what situations might you have an advanced lifter who's performing a multi joint
exercise again, let's go with the bench and able to count that as a stimulating set for more than
one muscle.
Because we made a comment, either you or I forget made a comment earlier say for an advanced lift
that they're usually going to get growth in one particular muscle with a lift like that.
But there's examples or these situations where that might not be the case.
Yes.
So ultimately if you've got an exercise that is very balanced between two muscle groups, then I
think you could see an advanced lifter counting as stimulus for for more than one muscle.
Now I think my my example for this would be I think the most obvious example is where you've got is
where you've got multi joint exercises like a squat and it has a very strong hip dominant component
to it.
So you've got a back squat and the lifter is performing in a way that is hip dominant.
I think you're going to have a doctor Magnus and quadriceps in that scenario.
And I think you're probably going to see a stimulus for both of those things.
The reason I argue that is because the quad is definitely the limiting factor, but I don't think
you're going to see any other exercise in the in the program being better for the doctor Magnus.
So at the end of the day, even if the Doctor Magnus is not maxing out in the squat, it probably
isn't quite then you aren't you haven't got anything better.
I mean, you couldn't make the same argument for a high foot position leg press if you want to, and
it will be the same situation.
So that kind of scenario, I think you're basically saying, well, I don't have anything better for
that muscle.
And it's not far away from the level of recruiting I'm seeing in the in the quad.
So pretty much.
So it's like if you would, but if you were to like try and do the same thing with a deadlift, you'd
be like, you know, I'm going to argue for maybe hamstrings and a doctor Magnus.
I'm like, well, are you doing any leg curls?
Because suddenly now it's like, well, I've got a leg curl and I can easily get way better stimulus
for my hamstrings and the leg curl I can in the, in the, in the deadlift variation.
So the deadlift starts to be like, well, probably not going to get to the point where my hamstrings
are maxing out to the level that I could train them elsewhere.
So I think the context of the program is important.
It's like, well, what else have you got in the program that will do this thing?
You know, so the problem gets a little bit more complicated.
So I think the first thing I'd do if somebody said, well, am I going to get, you know, stimulus from
more than one muscle in this exercise?
The first thing I'll be looking at is, well, what does the rest of the program look like?
So if you go back to our bench example, could you have someone who's advanced lifter who's getting a
stimulus for both, say triceps and chest?
I think it's unlikely unless they have, unless they've unless they've trained as a power lifter to
fix weaknesses, then I think it's unlikely.
I think what haens with exercises like a bench ress is that you start out with whatever your sort of
dominance is and then you just kind of increase that overtime and it gets worse and worse and worse
because you don't really think to fix it if a power.
Well, that was going to be my next question then because so let's say you did actually identify, you
know what, I am more chest dominant and triceps are taking a backseat here and I'm going to do more
direct triceps work and then that's going to increase the leverages of the triceps in that exercise.
Could you now theoretically go back to the bench and have it be a little bit more balanced?
That's exactly what happens.
I mean, we've got data showing that's exactly what happens.
So, you know, if, if and then powerlifters do it all the time.
I mean, they, they're looking for a scenario where all of their prime prime mover is not a muscle,
not a word and not a phrase I want to use.
But all of their contribute contributing muscles are, you know, kind of close to their maximum
levels.
And they're doing that by balancing those in the excise variation that they're, they're competing
in.
So, you know, the best possible bench press number that you could ever achieve would be in the
scenario where all of your pressing muscles are contributing similarly.
That that's just kind of how it works.
We don't want as a situation where one of them is contributing loads and the others are kind of
taking a back seat.
So and they will always work for showing up their weaknesses, doing extra accessories and all that
kind of thing and get to a point where they kind of get their maximum possible numbers.
They're kind of consciously or unconsciously working on that problem all the time.
But it was isn't necessarily going to do that.
So, but if you were to do that, then I think, yeah, you would probably find that you pretty much,
but again, you know, start coming back to this voluntary activation question.
It turns into a scapula playing puller.
It turns into a scapula playing puller.
It's like, you know, yeah, you're losing Motino Creamer, but where are you losing it from?
It's like it's losing it from all over the place.
So this is kind of why the more advanced people get, the more we're going to nudge them towards
trying to use sort of exercises with lower amounts of total muscle mass because, you know, that's
the easiest way of just maximizing recruitment in the target muscle.
And then you do something else for something else.
Now you know that this is not to say that exercise preferences are bad.
I mean, everyone's got their own exercise preferences and people want to train in another way.
That's totally fine.
That's not saying that, but you know, just in terms of the most logical strategy for an advanced
lifter, we would nudge them towards exercises that really do one thing really well instead of doing
a bunch of things not so well.
Yeah.
And this is also why you might have a beginner who, say, is doing pull ups and and growing exercises
and they're not doing any direct bicep curls, anything like that, and they're still able to grow the
biceps.
But then you have an advanced lifter who's doing that, and they're potentially not able to grow the
biceps.
Yeah, exactly.
So, you know, I mean it really, but again, it comes down to how the exercise is being performed and
what limiting factors.
I mean, I've said before that if you're doing, you know, some narrow grip pull ups and you know
you're getting your chin all the way over the bar, then that is definitely an elbow flexor limited
exercise.
I mean, it's probably a bracket radialis a limited exercise.
So you know, that's just because you're in the zone where by such bracket you're switching off and
the bracket realist has to do everything at that.
So you're probably going to find that your total amount of weight you can lift in that scenario is
limited by the brachioradialis and that's going to be the thing that grows as a result.
If you just stop before that point, you're going to find that you can lift loads more weight and the
lat will become the limiting factor instead of the brachioradialis and you'll start to see a
different type of appearance again.
And then similarly, you're going to have different people of different, you know, leverages.
Again, some people have amazing elbow flex leverage, some of them have amazing that leverage.
And it's again going to vary.
But fundamentally, I would say that, you know, you'll generally see the tendency towards multi net
exercises doing one thing for advanced lifters, whether they like it or not.
I.
Feel like this needs to be said.
If an exercise is being used to grow a certain muscle region, muscle fibers, those are you can't
use.
You can't say that that exercise is going to maintain the muscles that it's not effectively growing
in that plan, right.
So if if you're going to use something.
It will maintain any fibers that are being activated.
This is, this is what I said when I said, you know, this idea, whenever you look at something silly
that somebody's saying in the fitness industry, the assumption behind it is that you can train
muscles rather than muscle fibers.
That's, that's almost always the case.
There are other situations, but generally speaking, that's the assumption.
So when people are going, oh, I'm maintaining this muscle with this exercise even though it's not
training, and that's an absolute nonsense.
The only thing that's happening is you're maintaining.
Well, actually not.
You're maintaining training, you're training.
You're growing.
Yeah, exactly.
That's the thing, right?
It's whatever.
You think is maintaining it's like they're growing or not great.
But that's that's the point is the exercise is growing or it's growing, right?
Like it's not maintaining anything else.
So if you're going to use a hit trust, unless you're going to use that for growth in your quads, you
can't use it as maintenance of your quads.
It'll it'll grow the fibers that it's loading.
So I mean, actually does have a pretty decent level of quad activation.
It's just not anywhere close to the squat.
I mean it's.
Good, I know.
That's why I use it as an example, because what I hear people say is, oh, it's got good quad
activation, therefore it's enough to maintain all of the quads.
And no, no, no, again, fibre specific, the fibre said it is capable of growing are the fibres that
will be maintained.
You're not maintaining anything that you're not hypertrifying.
And this is the problem because a a non physiologically based hypertrophy researcher might look at
the ability of the hip thrust or glute bridge to maintain whole muscle mass levels of the quadriceps
and go it's a maintaining muscle mass.
Well, yeah, if you look at it from the outside, that's what it looks like.
But what's happening is that it's it's training fibers up to a certain level of routine increment
and then it's just completely ignoring everything above that point.
So what's happening is you're getting simultaneous hypertrophy and atrophy within the same muscle.
Now that's going to blow some people's mind, but that is exactly what is happening because fiber
hypertrophy and atrophy are occurring and both hypertrophy and atrophy are fiber specific concepts.
They happen at the fiber level.
That's an important point because you could have a beginner who's doing the hip trust and they could
actually grow quads even if they're not.
Doing other you would expect them to, yeah.
Yes, yeah.
So that they could be doing no other quad exercise and they could be growing quads.
Yeah.
And then you have an advanced lifter who has been doing squats, has been doing leg extensions and
they stop doing the leg extensions or whatever.
They do them once every two weeks or whatever the.
Rectum disappears.
Well, yeah, totally.
But then let's say they stop being the squad as well.
So now they're still doing the hip thrusts, but they're actually going to be atrophying the quad.
The quad is literally going to be any smaller, correct?
Yes, it's going to be providing A hypertrophy stimulus to some of the quad.
So you've got one lifter where it's able to actually stimulate growth and another lifter where
they're actually going to be experiencing atrophy in that muscle doing that same lift.
Exactly.
And So what hypertrophy researcher doesn't have that physiological background would look at that and
go, this is very confusing.
We don't know whether the whether the quads grow after hip it was training or not, because we've got
these studies showing that it does and these studies showing that it doesn't.
And it's like the physiologist is literally just scratching the head going what are you talking
about is obvious what's happening.
It's literally just a fibre specific phenomena.
You know this is another great example of why if you try and understand the hypoetry literature
without having a physiological background, it will make no sense to you at all.
It will literally just make you'll just be staring at it going, what on earth is happening here?
You've got, you know, numbers flying around all over the place.
And sometimes this thing does this thing and another time this exercise does a different thing.
And I don't understand why any of this is happening.
And so they start playing this kind of game of, you know, the top Trump's where they're like, you
know, sort of, oh, you know, this exercise, I've got these, these studies here that will prove this
point and these studies over here that prove that point.
And we just count the number of studies and we come out with, oh, evidence is in favour of this,
this because I've got 5 studies over here that show that thing and only four studies over here that
show the opposite thing.
It's like, well, no, think about it physiologically.
And actually all of those nine studies together now fit together because you've actually understood
the variable factors are.
And I think that's really the difference.
But I raised in the podcast.
Was it last week?
How are you going?
But I said there's evidence based and physi physiologically based on science based.
The two things are different.
You know, evidence is about, you know, how many studies have I got showing this thing and how many
studies have I got shown the opposite thing?
Science is about saying, well, how does this actually work?
What's what's driving these results?
Can I come up with one explanation that explains all of these data?
I mean, ultimately, if you look at this stretch like the, the length and partial stuff, right?
I mean, well, you've just explained there, you could do a study in muscles experience stretch being
at a hypertrophy and you could do it in beginners and you could do 15 of those studies.
And and then you could do one in an advanced lifter.
And you could be like, look, 15 of these showed growth.
Clearly it's better because you've only got 1, but now you.
Do 20.
In advanced lifters and you're like, oh, now the the evidence is, you know, swung the other way.
It's like, well, no, again, like you've explained, if you physiologically understand what's
happening.
Exactly.
And like in a, in a, we were talking about a whole bunch of podcast topics that we were going to do.
And you know, one of the titles, one of the topics we're going to cover in a future podcast is going
to be, you know, does fiber type affect the rate of atrophy?
You know, and so I was, I was explaining the, the, the kind of studies I've been putting together on
this.
And there is actually a really simple explanation for why we see really, really randomly different
results across all kinds of different study designs.
Sometimes you see slow twitch fibre atrophying more than fast twitch fibre.
And sometimes you see the opposite.
And it's like, well, why is that happening?
And actually, there's a really simple explanation for why you see all these various results.
But the instinctive response of a lot of researchers is to go, well, I've got 7 studies showing this
thing and eight studies showing the opposite.
And you know, oh, it's contentious.
And there's actually a really simple explanation, which I will not say here because I'm going to do
it as a future podcast topic, but if anybody wants.
For what it's worth is an explanation I've never heard.
I've never heard anyone give that explanation even remotely close to it.
So if someone's listening to this, I'm like, oh, I know what it is because everyone talking about
online, I don't think you do.
You do, yeah.
So we'll see what happens.
But there is, I think a very simple explanation that can be used to essentially predict the results
of most of the studies that I've seen in this in this area.
But you know, it has to be as you have to do it from a scientific point of view, you have to go what
is actually happening?
What is happening on a muscle fiber level?
What is happening on a whole muscle level?
What, what, what might we see in detraining studies?
What might we see in mobilization or bed rest or those kind of studies?
And then based on those physiological predictions, then look at what the studies actually show and
then say, well, OK, what's the explanation?
And it is actually fairly straightforward.
It's just you have to do it scientifically.
You can't do it from an evidence base though.
You just get nonsense outputs.
You know what's occurred to me?
This whole half a set idea.
It's the exact same idea or mentality that people would use to justify something like an upper lower
split or a part split, right Where they say, well, you're getting a crossover stimulus and and
that's maintaining and blah, blah, blah.
That's exactly what this half a set is saying it's saying.
Because it's relying on the same assumption.
Yes, the assumption is that you can train muscles.
Yes, as soon as a muscle is active, something is happening.
To every single fiber.
And that's the assumption.
And if you if you kind of push a hypertrophy researcher very hard enough on this topic, you press
them on this topic, they'll eventually be forced to admit that they are assuming that any stimulus
is occurring across the entirety of the muscle rather than on certain fibres.
And ultimately that is their kryptonite.
Because once you face them with that, everything about their entire model or models breaks down
because this just clearly not happening.
You know, we know hypertrophy is a fibre specific phenomenon, you know, and so any attempt to claim
that the entirety of the muscle is receiving a stimulus is nonsense.
And that's why they don't overtly state it.
It's just you have to kind of push them into a corner and until they have to admit it.
But ultimately that's the assumption that's breaking their ability to understand what's happening.
Not not as you say, it's the same problem whether you're talking about, you know, upper lower splits
and maintenance ideas, whether you're talking about half set stimuli for secondary muscles or
anything like that.
It's all the same error.
And it all comes back to hypertrophy and atrophy are fiber specific.
And the outcome is the same as well because again, like we've said, if you have a beginner who's
doing a multi joint lift, yes, they are going to experience growth in all of those muscles and you
have an advanced lifter.
And like we've talked about, they're probably going to get great than most likely one of those.
And you could say actually, because it's the same problem when it's the same outcome.
Well, that would kind of be how a split, an upper lower split, whatever would work as well, where
actually a beginner maybe will get a crossover stimulus where they're actually able to still
hypertrophy A secondary muscle on that day.
But someone who's an advanced lifter, they're likely not going to get that.
So you I feel like you can actually make an argument that something like an upper lower split might
be more suitable to someone who's maybe a bit more of a beginner than it would be to an advanced,
unless like there's better ways.
To program what you're saying there is that you you have less room to manoeuvre or you you can't
make as many mistakes with an advanced program.
That's it.
You can't make as many mistakes.
Yes, I mean you basically say you can get away with the worst program with beginners because they'll
grow from lifting a ton of beans.
I mean that's that's broadly what we're saying, isn't it?
I mean, so yeah, sure, you can write to worst program for a beginner and they'll still get a better.
They'll still get growth.
You know, you kind of have to get things right for your kind of more advanced lifters if you want to
continue pushing forward and making progress.
So yeah, no, I agree with that.
I mean, but I would still rather they did a decent program from the beginning.
Yes, yes.
Make the program better just initially.
Yeah, absolutely.
But it's, I guess what I find interesting about it is it's sort of the opposite, the opposite belief
or kind of, you know, the way people would look at these plans, they think that this stuff's going
to be more suitable for an advanced lift.
And like you're saying, well, you can make fewer mistakes, like you don't have that margin of error
there.
And it's just the opposite of what most people are assuming.
It's what's interesting is that I think we're kind of living through the end of a phase of time,
which has been a great kind of bodybuilding experiment with silly routines that don't really work
that well.
So, you know, obviously Silver era, which is our focus, you know, kind of ends in the mid 50s, you
know, and since then routines have kind of gone and, you know, various unhelpful directions and
people have been doing body part splits and that kind of thing, which really doesn't make a lot of
sense.
And we're kind of now seeing obviously this reaction against that as we're demonstrating that the
Physiology that, you know, makes most sense as the explanation for hypertrophy really just fits
perfectly well with the silver era, which is the last kind of period of time in which training
programs made sense.
So we've had this like, you know, I don't know, 60 year period of time in which bodybuilding
training has been silly.
I mean, before that it was pretty logical going back a couple of 1000 years and hopefully going
forward it'll be pretty, pretty logical.
And we just had this flash in the pan moment, which is really interesting because if you talk to a
hypertroure researcher, they'll say, Oh well, you know, bodybuilders have always done and always do
these kind of split routines online.
I'm sorry, you know, in what universe are you living?
Because prior to 1950, everybody in the history of you know, humanity has done full body training a
couple of times a week, 2, three times a week.
And hopefully going forward we'll start to see a return to that, to that tendency and we'll be able
to look at this 60 year period of time and go actually that was the anomaly, not the norm.
People are always thinking that you know, what we're recommending and what you know, other people
who follow the stimulating reps model are recommending is is new and different and and weird and and
like not the not the not the accepted way of training.
It's like, well, actually, no, your 60 year experiment with this split routine idea has been the has
been the weirdness.
We're returning to the way that people have been training since the beginning of time.
Yeah, exactly, exactly.
Often they hear people online say, oh, you know, no one's ever done it that way.
You know, no, this is how everyone always used to do it.
And I'm like, just look back a little bit further.
Like you told you, go back to the 80s and 10 years.
Cool, cool.
But let's just go back another one or two decades and you'll see it's completely.
Different.
Everything prior to that back to the ancient Greeks has been literally whole body training several
times per week.
And, you know, I think we're going to hopefully, you know, get to a point where people can look back
on this as being the anomaly, you know, rather than the, rather than the kind of the the accepted
kind of practice, which is kind of how a lot of people see it today.
And, you know, I do get messages, people saying, you know, why are you recommending this way of
training, which is completely different from the way that everybody else trains?
Like, well, because you're not looking at this from a historical perspective.
You're kind of assuming that what you see on your social media in the last couple of years or
decades, however long you've been looking at this stuff is, is, you know, kind of the is the
baseline.
And it's not the baseline.
It's full body training several times per week.
And all we're doing is identifying this 60 year period has been a bit of a silly period of time
which people lost track of what was going on because of the introduction of animal like steroids.
I think that's it for today's topic.
So thank you guys for joining us.
We appreciate it as always, and hopefully you'll join us next week for another episode.