Episode: 010 Warming up - what does it really achieve?
URL: https://open.spotify.com/episode/5zBTRmPxj1pr8Kh4HVAhK5
Published: 2025-07-28
================================================================================

Welcome back everyone to another episode of Hypertrophy, past and present.
Good morning.
It's my morning for the first time.
Normally I do.
Last time I had an evening coffee and now it's a it's a morning coffee for me.
So good morning, Chris.
How are you today?
I'm doing very well, thank you.
It's Yeah, it's good to be back after all my travels.
I've been jetting around all over the place.
It's nice to be in a settled place for the time being at an undisclosed location.
A.
Little bit of stability, how good.
Just before we jump into today's episode, I do want to mention this a few comments and stuff people
have been leaving the podcast and thank you guys for engaging.
Thank you guys for commenting and liking and sharing all that good stuff.
I will just mention when, if you guys do have questions, both yourself and I, we both do Q&A's every
week.
So if you don't have questions on anything we've covered in the podcast or past episode, even things
you want us to talk about, you're more than welcome to engage in our Q.
And as I love seeing the dialogue and the engagement on the podcast, but we don't tend to monitor
that as much and answer questions there.
So if you guys do have questions on what we're going to talk about today or what we've talked about
in the past, hop onto our Instagram and engage in our Q&A.
So let's jump into today's topic now.
I'm going to start with a plan, but before I start with our workout plan, I do want to just mention
what we're actually going to talk about today and why I want to talk about this particular plan.
And I want to give a little bit of context as to how this plan might be a little bit different to
some other plans as well.
So today we're going to talk about warming up, warm up sets.
What is a warm up?
Why do it?
Do you need to do it?
How do you do it?
And a question I get a lot with the silver area plans is what do they do for warm ups?
And I, I think a lot of people have noticed in, in you guys listening, you may have noticed when I
talk about these, these programs in the past, I often don't talk about any warming up.
And that's because they often don't talk about any warming up.
And there's a few exceptions to that.
So I did want to mention, we have talked about a few of Reg Park's plans.
And in my opinion, I'd say Reg Park is probably the most notable or explicit, I guess, with his
types of warming up sets.
So he does talk about them very clearly.
And he does suggest doing 2 warm up sets before like his five by five.
The first two sets of those are warm up sets and he actually explains like what percentages to use
and and he's very clear with that.
But that's a little bit of an outlier for some of these plans.
And generally speaking, these plans, I'd say at least half the time they don't talk about warming up
at all.
So I'm assuming that this is kind of like assumed knowledge.
People kind of knew what they were doing, right.
So the plan I want to talk about today, they outline another way of warming up, which is different
to what Reg suggested.
This is probably the most common type of warming up IC talked about in the pre storied era.
So it's different to how Reg did it, where he did it specifically for those exercises he was doing
in that workout.
So today's plan is a York barbell plan.
So we have talked about 1 York course in the past, which was the the York Miss America course.
So York obviously the the head of York barbell was Bob Hoffman, very, very influential figure in the
silver era.
He was Olympic weightlifting coach for America.
He coached many of the the first Mr. universes, including John Kremick and yeah, arguably one of the
certainly one of the most influential people in in pre storied era bodybuilding.
And this course comes from the York, the the first series of York courses.
This is in fact the first York barbell course.
So this was initially published I believe in 1936.
Again, obviously the date I'm working off this storage is early 50s.
And so we're talking a couple of decades before then.
And the course, I've mentioned this in the past.
So obviously when it comes to sets and reps, there's a bit of leeway there.
Obviously sets weren't commonly used or they were kind of beginning to be used and generally
speaking, especially from a like a York Barbell perspective, that were kind of pretty flexible with
how one were to do that.
So in this course, the initial instructions were to do one set of each of these exercises and you
would do six start with six repetitions.
You would progress it to 12 or 10 or 12 depending on the exercise and then you would add weight and
come back down to six.
But they did acknowledge and especially Hoffman did acknowledge that if you were more advanced, you
could certainly add a second set.
He called it the heavy light method where you would do like a set of seven then and you would rest.
It wasn't like a long rest.
You would dress like 30 to 60 seconds type thing.
You would reduce a a bit of weight about 10% off the bar and then you would do another set of seven
or so.
So that was kind of you need had a bit of flexibility there on on sets.
But he did suggest everyone start just with this single set method first.
So the first instruction given here is to start with a warming up exercise.
Now, a common theme you do see with a lot of these lifters and these courses is they do actually
suggest or emphasize how important it is to in fact be warm.
OK, not even part of the warming up.
But they say things like, you know, wear tracksuit pants and a hoodie if it's cold.
Or, you know, maybe go for a walk before you start lifting.
Like this is emphasis on actually you want the muscles to be warm, OK.
And then assuming muscles are warm, what we're doing is starting with this warming up exercise.
And essentially what they describe here is you use an empty bar.
And he, he specifically says having collars on a bar.
I'm assuming that that is like a spacer.
I'm not exactly sure, but he says like you walk up to the bar on the floor, an empty bar on the
floor and you pick it up.
Basically he describes A deadlift position and then he says you suddenly, you quickly done
dynamically, you'll bring the bar up into that sort of hang position and then you essentially do a
snatch with it.
So you bring the bar in front of you and then the bar overhead and you're finishing this overhead
locked out position and then you lower the bar again and you do this 12 times.
So and he, he's very clear that this is not a strength exercise.
You are not trying to add weight, you're not trying to, you know, make this sort of challenging in
terms of load.
He says this is an exercise to warm up your muscles.
That is it, right?
You do this 12 * 1 set and then you move into the workout.
Now the first exercise is a barbell curl and again we're doing this single set, 6:00 to 11:50.
So barbell curl.
Then you go into a barbell overhead press.
Then you go into a what they call the deep knee bend on toes.
So we're doing a heels elevated squat.
Then we go into a 2 arm pullover.
Now the pullover, I've talked about this in the past.
Typically they're doing this with slightly high repetitions and they're doing this a little bit away
from from failure.
So they they emphasize this like a light pullover with this.
They normally do like 10 to 20 repetitions.
The idea here was you're breathing in really deeply, expanding the chest between the squats or after
the squats.
Then we go into a stiff leg deadlift and then essentially what is a bench?
So they call it a back press on a box or a bench or a supine press, But essentially we're just
talking at bench press and then we've got side bends.
So you have the barbell on your back like a squat and you're doing side bends with it.
Then we have the Jefferson lift and then a standing calf raise.
Now after the standing calf raise, he has like a little kind of almost like a superset here.
And it is AI believe we've talked about this maybe in one plan in the past, what they call a
straddle hop, which is a bit of a funny one to imagine.
So, and it's not one that I, I don't see this talked about very often and I haven't seen it make a
recurrence since this time period.
So I think it maybe fell out of favour.
But what this straddle hop is, is essentially you're in the same position as you've just done the
standing calf race.
You've got the barbell on your back using the same load and then you have your feet together, you
have your heels together.
I think you're toys made you point it out a little bit and you essentially jump spreading your feet,
he says 24 inches to the sides and then you jump, bring your feet back together and you repeat this
as many times as you can.
So it's an interesting exercise choice.
And then we concluded with a barbell shoulder like a, a vertical shrug.
So we have 10 exercise, well, 11 exercise including the straddle hub and 12 if we include the
warming up exercise.
Over to you, Chris.
What what do you see?
What do you?
What's your take on that?
What do I see?
I imagine that most people who have been following that list of exercises through, I'm not going to
be surprised by what I now say because I think it's relatively straightforward to see some of the
positives and negatives in that in that list.
Interestingly, in previous episodes where we've analysed these programs, we've, we've noticed that
deadlift was surprisingly absent.
We didn't feel like there was much use of a deadlift, despite the fact that it's quite a, an obvious
thing to do.
If you don't have lots of equipment and you're in that kind of territory where you've got a barbell
on the floor and you've got to do something with it and the obvious thing to do is to pick it up.
I mean that, that would be the deadlift.
We've got 2 deadlift variations here.
We've got a stiff leg and we've got the, we've got the Jefferson.
So that's really, really interesting that we've got that usage of, of deadlifts in this program.
And of course, stiff leg again solves one of the problems that I've argued before about some of
these silver area routines, which is that hamstrings don't tend to get very much attention.
And clearly here we've got a stiff leg deadlift, which is not the most amazing exercise for the
hamstrings, but it is definitely better than nothing, which is kind of one of the problems that we
do tend to see with these routines.
So that's what I would say is definitely a positive.
Again, you know, kind of looking at negatives, as I always comment, there's very little lat, lat
work here.
There's very little back work here.
So apart from the deadlift variations, which are obviously going to give you some back stimulus,
there's no pulling exercises of any kind really.
There's no row and there's no lat pull down.
You know, and as I've mentioned before, those are not difficult exercises to do with minimal
equipment.
You can do rows relatively easily and you can do pull ups relatively easily.
So I don't know why we wouldn't have those.
It makes very little sense to me to ignore them, especially when you're throwing in things like, you
know, kind of whatever that straddle hop thing is and you know, sort of side bends.
I mean, come on, if you've got space in your program to do stuff like that, you've got space in your
program to do pull ups and rows.
I mean, come on, let's be serious.
On the side bends, because like I said, this is very early, this is 1936, right?
And what I do notice with side bends is they do get left behind.
So I don't know if people remember our first course.
We talked about them then Milo Barbell course.
So that was like 1901 or something when that was published in 1910.
Very early on they they were using things like side bands.
And then we still see them here present in the 30s.
But then once we get to like the 40s and 50s, Moise people have left them behind.
Yeah, absolutely.
I think that's that's one of those interesting things where, you know, people observe the effects of
exercises and they notice that it doesn't seem to be doing anything positive and it gets dropped,
you know, and I think that's that's the nice thing about, you know, reading up on this and read and
researching this silver era material is because you can be relatively confident that those guys were
noticing things and it was meaningful observations.
Of course, now when everybody's growing all the time because of anabolics, you can't really make
those observations.
It's like, well, everything's growing, so what's working?
I don't know, you know, it's nice to have that ability to, you know, notice when things are working
so that that would really be only my only observations really.
I don't, I don't have anything particularly exciting.
It's nice.
Again, we've got both bench presses and overhead presses.
I mean, obviously we've talked about this and you've explained how aesthetics changed over time.
And in the earliest programs you didn't send, you didn't tend to get bench pressing because there's
no real chest emphasis at all as aesthetics changed and people, but we had more shoulder work in the
beginning and now we've got less shoulder work direct and we've got the bench pressings in in its
place.
So again, just repeating what we said before.
One other thing I want to highlight here is the exercise order.
I don't know, I don't know if you'll agree with me on this, but if we look at, so we start starting
with a curl, like a lot of these plans start with a curl.
And often I hear people say, well, how would you do that when you put that last?
So, you know, it doesn't make more sense to do that.
And you know, normally people say after back, and as you pointed out, there's not a lot of back
here, but we go from a curl to an overhead dress.
Now, obviously the overhead dress, you're going to be using more weight than the curl, I would
assume.
And then we go into the squat, which again is going to really be more weight.
They do say you start with the load that you use for your overhead, right?
But then obviously you're going to progress at different paces.
And then the stiff leg, which again, you start at a similar weight, but I assume they're probably
going to be able to use more load there as well.
And then it's almost like we reset.
So then we kind of go back to the bench.
We'll go low end weight again, then to the Jefferson lift or side exercise, the Jefferson lift and
then the shrug.
And there's almost like generally this ascending kind of load that'll be used throughout the
workout.
And in the context of warming up and understanding that apart from this dynamic exercise are doing
at the start, this Olympic lift, there's no other real warm up.
I wonder if that exercise selection in some ways maybe was intentional around that, like A, the fact
that using lighter loads B, so we're going from an overhead dress into a like a bench later on, or
we're going from a squat into the stiff leg deadlift.
Like I wonder if if that ordering or that sequence kind of helps that.
Like if you were to start with a stiff leg deadlift and then go into a squat, like would that be a
lot more challenging or or you know, uncomfortable in this context where you're not warming up than
if you were to start with pills and overhead etcetera?
I was wondering about whether there might be an element to practicality because and it doesn't look
like it works perfectly at all.
But you could imagine a scenario where if you're relatively sort of strong guy and you've got 1
barbell and you want to do a whole sequence of exercises, you don't really want to be doing, you
know, sort of.
I mean, for example, you don't want to be doing biceps curls and then deadlifts and then and then
and then going back to, you know, I don't know, something, you know, equally light.
So you kind of spending your life putting plates on and off the barbell.
Whereas if you have something like biceps curls and then overhead press, well, you're putting some
plates on, but not a lot.
And then you go from there, head press to the squat, you're going to put a whole load of other
plates on top of that.
I can kind of see maybe there's a sort of, and it breaks down after that and the pattern doesn't
really work, you know, but I can kind of see a scenario in which you might plan your workout, not
necessarily around, you know, ideal exercise order like we might do.
We might walk into a gym and go, oh, I can do that exercise on that machine and I can walk over
there and do that on that.
And it's also vectorized and I don't have to carry plates around.
Whereas they're in a different situation.
They've got these limitations on them that are actually practical.
So maybe there's a little bit of that there.
And it, as I say, it doesn't work perfectly at all.
After you get to the squat exercise, after that, it kind of messes around a little bit.
You can kind of see a scenario where you might have a requirement to, you know, move from exercises
that use less weight to those that use more weight and then come back down again.
Now, I would reorder the exercises if I was, if I was genuinely doing that, but it does, it does
kind of strike me definitely those first three exercises, you strike me as potentially A sequential
order of using more and more weight from one exercise to the next.
Other than that, I'm not really seeing anything obvious that I would I would kind of point to.
What's your take on that warming up exercise?
So obviously Hoffman was a Olympic coach, so he's going to, you know, kind of naturally sort of
choose something that is basically an Olympic lifting warm up or part of 1.
So I'm not surprised that he's got that there.
The question is, what does it really do in the context of somebody who's not then doing Olympic
lifts as part of their routine?
There's no Olympic lifts in this.
There's bits of exercises that you could say are close to Olympic lifts.
You know, you've got shrug in there, you've got sort of squat in there, you've got deadlift in
there.
You know, there's little bits that you can kind of say are close, but they're not really requiring
the kind of shoulder mobility, you know, genuine whole body movement patterns that you would
actually see in an Olympic weightlifting exercise.
I did actually wonder when you were describing the the straddle hop, whether there might be some
element of Olympic lifting in there.
But it's it's not not really going in the right direction, but it does have that same kind of feel
to it.
But ultimately, I think probably what we're seeing there is, is Hoffman's Olympic weight lifting
background coming through in the kind of peripheral aspects of the worker.
I think that's probably all it is.
With this straddle hop, there's nothing that comes to mind for you as to what that would be
achieving, no?
Not at all, no.
It is.
It is definitely a funny one.
I've not seen anyone in the gym performing that.
OK, so the warming up exercise, let's move on to what is it we are trying to achieve in a warm up.
I think that's a really, really good question.
So I might not be able to answer that immediately.
In terms of what we can can achieve, I think that what people are believing they're achieving is one
of two things.
It's going to either be that they are somehow enhancing the stimuli that the workout is capable of
achieving.
And secondly, it's going to be they're reducing the likelihood of injury risk could occur in the
workout they're about to do.
So it's going to be one of those two things or both of them.
But so ultimately, what we want to answer then is what kind of warm up might enable us to achieve
those things and what do we need to know physiologically to be able to answer that question.
So really, I think what we can do is identify 2 separate categories of physiological information
that sits under those two headings.
So we've got the performance improvements leading to improved stimuli.
And then secondly, we've got the injury risk reduction.
And under those under those two headings we can look the warming up a temperature wise of a muscle
and separately we can look at post activation potentiation and other potentiation mechanisms and we
can look at those under each of those two headings of stimuli and injury prevention.
So if we start with the the warming up temperature, what we're saying here is basically that if you
physically warm a muscle up, now conventionally this is done with low intensity aerobic exercise.
So if you do 15 to 20 minutes of low intensity aerobic exercise, then the muscle that you're using.
So if you're on a treadmill, it's the legs.
If you're on, you know, kind of sort of a bike that has handles to move that you can use the whole
body, then obviously you'll use more muscles of the upper body as well as the lower body.
But fundamentally, the muscles you're using in the Arabic exercise will warm up.
And what you'll notice is that that temperature increase has an impact on the workout that you're
about to do in terms of performance characteristics.
So the interesting thing is you can mimic that by literally just putting the muscle that you're
testing in a bath of warm water.
So if you're going to do quadriceps testing, you can literally have somebody sit in the bath of warm
water and it will actually mimic the effect I'm about to describe from low intensity rubric
exercise.
So what happens is that the performance measures are like Walmart Max's or for example, high
velocity performance.
For example, you might test throwing ability or something like that.
They tend to increase quite noticeably.
Now the interesting thing is the reason this happens is very well described.
What happens is that the actinomyosin cross bridges are essentially dependent on a temperature
dependent supply of energy.
So if you are looking to create cross bridges relatively rapidly, you can do that more effectively.
You can do that more quickly if you have a higher temperature of the muscle.
If you start to sort of cool the muscle down, what you'll notice is that the rate of cross bridge
formations slows down.
Now interestingly if you live in a cold country and you go outside and you forget your gloves,
you'll notice this straight away because what will happen is your hands will actually not be able to
move anywhere near as quickly as they would do inside warm building.
It actually doesn't change your grip strength that much.
It actually changes the speed of shortening because it's mimicking essentially what metabolite
related fatigue does.
It slows you down because it slows down the rate of cross bridge formations.
Obviously the opposite.
Warming the muscle with either aerobic exercise or a warm water will actually do the opposite and
actually increase the rate of cross bridge formations.
Now the question is then answering the first question, does that change the stimuli for the workout
in the workout that we're going to do?
Well, it depends on what you're trying to stimulate to happen.
If you want to trigger, for example, a adoptions relating to high velocity movement.
So let's say you're interested in triggering a speed related adoption.
You're an athlete or you're coaching athletes and you want the athlete to develop some speed related
adoptions like increased firing rates or increased muscle fiber shortening velocities, those kind of
things.
You'll notice actually that increasing muscle temperature helps you create the stimuli or a bigger
stimuli for those adoptions.
What is the fundamental characteristic that enables us to trigger an increase in rate coding in
motion and firing frequencies, but it's actually achieving a high firing frequency.
So how do we do that?
Well, we move as fast as we possibly can.
If temperature increasing allows us to move faster, then you'll actually hit a higher firing
frequency and it actually trigger adaption to a greater extent.
The same thing will happen with muscle fibre shortening velocity and you can kind of start to see
that the temperature related, this sort of increase in muscle temperature actually is helping us
trigger a stimulus, a bigger stimulus in those particular contexts.
But if you could say, well, OK, well, does that help me trigger a bigger hypertrophy stimulus?
Well, no, it doesn't.
It doesn't physiologically it almost certainly doesn't.
Now the reason I say that is because if you look at what happens when you have a higher muscle
temperature, you create more cross bridges more quickly.
That's that's that's why we get the faster shortening velocity.
That's why we get the faster rate coding as a result of the faster shortening velocity.
If you are triggering more cross bridges per second, you'll develop more metabolite related fatigue.
So you'll actually hit failure earlier.
So The thing is, you end up with the same dosage of total mechanical tension across your set because
you're just producing cross bridges more quickly.
Assuming you want to do that, you may not actually do that because you may not actually want to do
that.
So you may actually just carry and use it the same temper was using before.
But fundamentally, you can't actually change the mechanical tension stimulus by doing that, because
you just create more metabolite relative T.
So from a hypertrophy perspective, it would be the equivalent to if you were to to say reverse and
an exercise to make the resistance profile more flat.
Exactly.
That's exactly what you would be doing.
You would basically be creating more instead of having a very steep resistance profile and you're
just kind of using a load of cross bridges of high threshold motive muscle fibers.
And one part of the range of motion, you're basically what you're doing now is you're creating a
larger range of motion where those cross bridges are required to form, flattening the resistance
profile.
And So what ends up happening is that you just end up failing earlier because the experience of each
repetition is now harder.
You're doing the same thing.
So ultimately you create the same stimulus at the end of the set as you would do if you hadn't done
the warm up.
So the interesting thing is that increased muscle temperature is actually really interesting from an
athletic point of view, especially on the speed end of the spectrum.
It really does help that kind of adaption.
Less so on the, I think on the strength end.
But you know, maybe you can make an argument for being able to use slightly more weight and that
greater weight maybe having a tendon related effect or a customary related effect.
It's It's a very thin argument in comparison with the speed related adoptions, which I think is a
relatively solid 1.
Would there be an impact in coordination?
So coordination obviously is is velocity specific.
So if you move faster, you're going to have a better chance of practicing with a faster speed.
It's going to mostly again be at the speed end of the spectrum.
I think The thing is warming up prior to a workout is so much so clearly beneficial for speed
related adoptions.
It's not actually as clearly obviously better for strength related adaptions and it's pretty much
clearly not going to help from a hypertrophy point of view.
So for people who are listening to this and are literally only interested in bodybuilding, which is
I guess a large portion of our sort of listening public, this is not warmups are not going to help
you trigger a a larger hypertrophy stimulus, I don't believe, because it's just going to create the
reality is people are using a fixed tempo or a self selected kind of non maximal tempo.
They're not even going to be using the benefit that the warm up gives them because the cross bridges
are not going to form faster because they're just going to form at the speed that you tell them to
form.
So all that's going to happen is that you're going to, you know, kind of use the same amount of
hypertrophy, create the same amount of hypertrophy stimulus with the available cross bridges that
you've got.
So you shouldn't notice an impact on, say, total repetitions in this.
I don't.
Believe that you would see one, no.
I don't believe so, even, because in my head I'm wondering whether people would be thinking, well,
is that going to influence measuring or tracking progressive overload?
Sometimes I'm warmed up and sometimes I'm not.
Well, that brings us to the next physiological observation.
So that was that was muscle temperature.
How does muscle temperature affect, you know, kind of the stimuli for giving adaptations?
And what I've argued there is that I think it dramatically affects the possibility to trigger speed
related adaptations.
And I've mentioned things like firing rate and muscle fibre shortening velocity and you've also
brought to the coordination factor, which again is definitely a possibility.
The other category of physiologically relevant mechanisms are the post activation potentiation or
just generally potentiation mechanisms.
So there are two kind of potentiation mechanisms that we would want to talk about here.
One of these is the post activation potentiation effect, PAP effect, and the other is the post
activation performance enhancement effect, Pape effect.
So we refer to those as PAP and Pape.
There's a section of my FAQ that explains why that happened.
It's basically a historical issue.
We actually originally referred to all temporary potentiation mechanisms as PAP effect.
We've now separated PAP and Pape off because PAP has a very clear physiological explanation for it.
Pape doesn't and the PAP effect is a kind of a one to five minute effect whereby you essentially get
an instantaneous increase in force production across the entire force velocity spectrum as a result
of the actinomyosin cross bridges moving close, sorry not the cross bridges.
Actinomyosin themselves move closer to each other, so you end up forming cross bridges more rapidly.
Now the interesting thing here is that that probably does increase performance even on a repetition
strength issue.
So if you're me, obviously moving the myosin closer to actin will give you a higher one Max and
it'll give you a higher maximal kind of throwing speed and things like that.
As I say across the whole force velocity spectrum, it probably also increases Rep strength.
Now, the reason I say that is because we are increasing the efficiency of the cross bridge
formation.
We're not doing what I was talking about previously.
We're creating more cross bridges per second.
We are essentially increasing the the efficiency of the contraction.
So I think we probably would see a repetition strike.
Now I honestly don't know if that has been tested.
So I'm going to kind of be cautious about saying that that's definitively going to happen.
But I think that would be a potential way in which you would see an increase in as you say
progressive overload.
But definitively we are going to see strength increases, we are going to see velocity increases.
Now how do you create a Pap effect?
You create a Pap effect basically by activating the muscle fibre for a short period of time.
Now why I say very short period of time is because we have got data showing you can get Pap effects
from like high velocity movements.
So one of the most interesting practical applications of Pap effect is where you actually get
somebody to do a maximal F of vertical jump maybe 30 seconds to a minute before they do a set of
squats, heavy squats.
And you will actually notice an improvement in things like bar speed in that scenario and maybe even
things like a three Rep or one Max.
So some people have said, you know, pap effects need like, you know, a certain period of time
doesn't look like that Pap effects look like they happen instantaneously as soon as you activate the
relevant muscle fibers.
So in practical terms, if you want to create a PAP effect because you're training an athlete that's
doing fast kind of you know, for for speed related adaptations, for example, or even strength
related adaptations because you will get a heavier load out of them.
If you can get the Pap effect implemented, you actually only need to do a fast single fast velocity
repetition and you've created the Pap effect.
You don't need to do anything other than that.
So it's actually very, very easy and simple thing to achieve.
So in practical terms, if somebody wants that for a set of like hypertrophy type repetitions,
they're doing bodybuilding, you're going to need to slightly reconstruct the way that you think
about warmups.
Because if you're doing say a set of repetitions to warm up and you're not doing any maximal efforts
at any point, which is pretty normal.
I mean, most people are going to do a maximal effort in the warm up before they do a set of, you
know, kind of set to failure.
You are probably going to need to think about doing a single high effort repetition, even if that's
with a lighter load to get that PAP effect.
If you want to do that, Whether or not this does change the hypertrophy stimulus is really quite
difficult to assess.
Honestly don't know.
I wouldn't want to come down hard on either side of the debate here really at the moment.
If it does change efficiency, maybe it does change the magnitude of the mechanical tension stimulus
on the set, but honestly I I really wouldn't want to be committed to one side of the argument at
this point.
I think it's going to be interesting to see if people do more work on this and whether it turns out
to be a relevant factor, but at the moment I don't want to be too committed either way.
So the key part there is effort.
So it doesn't need to be a low weight or a a vertical jump or something like that.
It could actually just be a load that was like A5 Rep Max or heavier and you could do a single
repetition without.
It could be absolutely any load at all.
The, the problem you're going to have is that if you're trying to say, for example, you've, you've
worked your way through a set of warm up a repetitions, however you normally do them, and you're now
trying to integrate this concept into your routine.
You could pick any load you like and as long as the effort level is high so that the recruitment is
high, you'll get the effect.
The problem is that if you pick a really heavy load, like for example, if you're planning to do 5-6
Rep Max as your work set and you think, oh, I'll just do a single before I do that, That's actually
going to create quite a lot of fatigue because the duration of the Rep is going to be quite slow and
you're giving a lot of time for metabolites to accumulate and calcium ions to accumulate.
If you just drop the weight down slightly so that you can do the Rep and it's over with and done,
it's like a 10 Rep Max or 12 Rep Max and it's pop and you've done it.
You're not going to get that same problem, but you are still going to get the benefits.
Yeah.
So that would involve someone being very intentional about doing it.
You you need to perform a Max effort, right.
So what I like about say if you were to use a heavy load, say you do use A5 Rep Max, you do a single
and then you would presumably you'd want to rest a full rest period before doing your working set.
Even if you're not intentionally doing that effort, that that Rep with a a high effort like it is
happening by default.
Whereas if you use a 10 Rep Max, then what you're saying there like you need to intentionally be as
fast as possible in the concentric, yeah.
Yeah, absolutely.
I mean, I think ultimately this is starting to move into practical territory where we're trying to
sort of think about how to make it work.
But ultimately, you know, the the key physiological trigger is just achieving a activation of the
relevant muscle fibres.
So yeah, we can do that with any load you like, you just have to use Max effort.
The only then questions that follow up after that are, is this practical?
Do I create fatigue at the same time and that kind of stuff.
Fundamentally, physiologically, it's just activating the fibers.
So in the warming up exercise we described at the start, presumably that would have had had a path
effect on some muscles or some muscle fibers then?
Yeah, but it's only going to last for about 5 minutes Max.
You're not going to get an effect lasting any longer than that.
So that's why I say one of the most interesting ways of using an athletic context is to do a fast,
single, fast repetition like a jump or a throw prior to doing a heavy strength training exercise.
That's a really nice way of doing it, but ultimately you're only going to keep that effect for those
couple of minutes before it dies away.
There's a bit of debate happening online at the moment with this topic as to whether a unloaded, I
don't know what you would call it, where you basically do the exercise, you do repetition unloaded.
So say you're doing a bicep curl without any bar, you're literally just performing the motion of a
bicep Skittle and as fast as possible and the question in just a single repetition.
And so there's debate over would that cause a path effect or not?
Yeah, I think you probably would.
I mean, ultimately there's the question over are you, are you capable of moving genuinely as fast as
you possibly can when you've got to immediately start decelerating the moment you start the
movement?
Because when you do a movement like that and it's, you've got, I mean, the thing about a jump is
that you leave the ground.
So you don't need to worry about the end of the movement.
If you're talking about something like a biceps curl, you don't really want to finish the biceps
curl in a way that you finish a jump where you literally just allow it to finish on its own because
that's that's dangerous.
So you're going to start immediately decelerating as soon as you accelerate.
So the question is, do you actually get to Max speed in those single joint scenarios?
And I don't know, I don't know the answer to that question.
But fundamentally, physiologically, yes, a fast repetition, if you do achieve Max effort is enough.
You don't.
I mean that literally.
There are studies showing that for both upper body and lower body, it's not controversial.
In terms of hypertrophy, yeah, I'm not entirely sure whether it does actually benefit us or not.
It really comes down to, you know, are you getting a higher dosage of mechanical tension across the
set by the movement of myosin closer to actin?
And that comes down to is it actually an efficiency modifier or is it just allowing you to produce
more cross bridges in at the same period of time?
If it's in the genuine efficiency modifier, you're actually doing something that's changing the
efficiency of that of that connection.
Yes, it will create a bigger mechanical tensions doing this.
If it's just allowing you to move more cross bridges in the same period of time, then no, it won't
because you'll just get more metabolite related fatigue and therefore you'll end up in the same
place as you would do if you're warming up with temperature increase that we talked about
previously.
And I don't know the answer to that question.
I don't know whether it is an efficiency modifier.
I do have one more question on this.
So if you were to do multiple sets, then let's say your first set was into failure.
Let's say you do 2 sets of eight to 10 repetitions.
In your first set, you keep 2 reps in reserve and then your second set you go to failure.
Presumably that first set has produced a Pap effect for your second set.
Yes, But then the second question then is why in a single set, why do you say you do 10 repetitions?
Why does repetition 6 not produce a PAP effect for repetition 7 onwards?
It probably does.
It probably does.
I mean, The thing is most of these PAP effect studies have been done with relatively small numbers
of repetitions.
They're testing 1 Rep Max as they're testing, you know, kind of jump heights, you know, kind of
short distance Sprint speeds, that kind of thing.
So the chances are that we do get a PAP effect towards the back end of the set.
So it really is probably just affecting the kind of early repetitions, not really affecting much
after that.
So again, the question arises is, you know, is it even worth worrying about?
Really tricky question.
Tricky question.
OK.
So, so far we're learning at a place where from a high pursuit perspective, it's questionable where
the warming up so far is providing much of A benefit.
Absolutely.
I mean the really the only other mechanism that we've got to describe is the paper effects.
We've described the Pap effect now the paper effect and unfortunately here we just don't know what's
going on at all.
So in contrast to the Pap effect where we've got a very, very well described physiological
mechanism, which is this moving of myosin closer to actin that is extremely well described.
We know exactly, more or less, exactly more or less.
We know how it works.
In contrast, the AER effect is completely unknown.
We don't know the underlying mechanism.
We've got some data that has enabled us to rule out certain factors.
It looks like we can, I mean, you can read reviews on this stuff and people will talk around it and
then describe all the possibilities.
But the reality is we've got data showing that the Pape effect is later in time.
So it kind of lasts longer than the PAP effect, up to about maybe even 15 minutes.
And in that period of time, we've got data showing that you can produce a Pape effect, a
potentiation effect, even in the presence of supraspinal CNS fatigue.
So that's really important because one of the most common kind of claims on the Internet is that
warmups are about increasing the activation of the central nervous system.
No, they're not.
We know they're not because the PAP effect has got nothing to do with the central nervous system.
And the PAP effect happens in the absence, sorry, in the presence of superspinal CNST.
So again, showing that it's not being generated by the central nervous system.
So when people say, oh, we're doing potentiation of activation exercises to get the CNS to do
something different, that's not what's happening.
We can rule out the CNS being the, the, the, the, the fact that it's changing.
We can also rule out the muscle temperature being the factor because paper effects are actually
triggered by things that don't warm the muscle up.
Yes, you can read reviews and they'll go maybe muscle temperature changes are a factor.
No, they're not, because you can literally create a paper effect in like a couple of seconds.
You can't warm a muscle up in a couple of seconds.
It doesn't work like that.
So it's very mysterious, Very, very mysterious what's going on with this paper effect.
But it's probably local, and until somebody figures out whether it's affecting the mechanical
tension stimulus locally, we're not going to know whether it's something that's helpful for
hypertrophy.
Ultimately, you know, that's kind of where we are.
We're stuck really until somebody does some more work on this.
This is one of those things.
It's like delayed onset muscle soreness.
You know, I don't have an explanation that I can.
I think people just sort of assume that I've got an explanation for everything.
I don't.
There's things that I don't have data for enough data for to be able to pull a model together.
And paper effect is one of those things I don't have enough data for.
You know, I'd love to have more data for it because it's a really interesting phenomenon.
And if it does affect hypertrophy stimulus, it would actually change things very slightly because
you might want to try and trick sort of judge your rest period not just based on the fatiguing
problems, but also on catching the wave of your paper effect.
And that would mean you'd actually take quite a lot longer rests because paper effect tends to peak
around 8 minutes or so.
So very, very approximately.
So instead of kind of going down the route to saying, well, we'd, we'd use a rest period geared
around letting superspinal CNST dissipate, which is my current recommendation, we might actually
shift things and say, well, actually let's serve the wave of the paper effect.
Now that would then push you towards maybe thinking about antagonist supersets or something like
that, so that you could actually catch these waves of paper effect in sequential exercises without
O.
There's some really, really interesting imlications of this being a thing.
And that's one of the reasons why I don't want to claim it's a thing until I know it's a thing,
because this actually has pretty profound implications for how you might structure a strength
training program.
And so let me reiterate that I do not know yet whether or not the paper effect does change the
mechanical tensions doing this.
I don't know the answer to that question.
So I'm not going to kind of suggest that anybody programs on that basis.
So what we can now do is we can say of these three things that we described, muscle temperature
changes, you know, kind of with generic warmups, PAP effects and paper effects.
Does any of that stuff change injury prevention?
Sorry, does any of that stuff change injury risk and is it therefore worth doing from an injury
prevention point of view?
So on this I can what I can point to very clearly is that increased muscle temperature does reduce
the risk of muscle strain injury.
What it does is it actually requires more kinetic energy to be generated in order to actually reach
a certain muscle length.
So muscle strain injuries we can talk about in more detail at another time, but fundamentally what
happens is that when you stretch your muscle to a certain length, it tends to tear.
And if you have a muscle that's capable of producing more force, then you'll have to put in more
kinetic energy to get to the tearing length.
So things like increased muscle temperature have been shown to actually be quite beneficial for
reducing muscle strain injury risk.
So we could.
Also hypothesize that PAP effects and paper effects would be similarly effective because they're
increasing the capacity of the muscle to produce force and therefore increasing its ability to
resist being lengthened to a tearing length.
Now it's complicated to explain why that tearing length can be reached in a strength training
situation, but you know, I can cover that in potentially a future conversation.
But essentially when you know we do do lots of kind of the muscle damaging exercise, you can
actually reduce the tearing length to the point where it does occur inside of a excise range of
motion.
So essentially summarizing muscle temperature definitely does reduce the risk of strain injury by
making it harder for the muscle to get to the tearing length.
And we could therefore suppose not been tested, but we could suppose that both PAP and paved Perfect
would do the same thing.
So essentially, I think there's a lot stronger argument for the the kind of the purpose of a warm up
being for injury risk reduction than there is for it producing a increase in hyper to be stimulus.
I think that's very weak.
In contrast, I do think it's quite strong for speed related adaptations.
So athletes who are training for high performance sport and high velocity movements, I think that
warmups will work both for the stimulus being increased, for those adaptations that relate to speed
as well as injury prevention.
And I think that probably is the kind of the group of people I would say warmups are most important
for you guys for hypertrophy training.
I think really unless it turns out that post activated potentiation or or Pape the purple paper
capable of increasing the mechanical tension stimulus, I'm very sceptical.
Very sceptical is probably a bit harsh.
I am uncertain about whether that is a thing.
I think it's much more going to be on the injury prevention side that we would do warmups for
hypertrophy.
So there's so many different ways people do warmups and there's obviously so much debate about, you
know, how should they be done?
Obviously, what are they doing which you've covered so far?
I, I want to cover as many of those questions as possible.
Is there anything else you want to talk about theoretically before we jump into some of the
application?
No, I think we've covered everything there in terms of the Physiology as I've hopefully we laid it
out, we've just got these three physiological things.
We've got the temperature of the muscle, we've got the PAP, the post activation potentiation effect,
we've got the Pape, the post activation performance enhancement effect.
And we can look at those under the headings of both, you know, kind of stimuli for specific
adaptations by poetry being the one that we're interested in most.
And then secondly, we can look at it from an injury prevention point of view.
So with that matrix, I think we've kind of covered everything that I wanted to say.
Great.
So I'm going to try to, I guess, verbalize maybe some of the questions people might have in their
mind as listening to this.
And some of the questions I get a lot about warmups.
And one of them would be in this maybe maybe ties into a little bit with the injury prevention.
I'm not sure.
But another reason I guess people might think about warmups is I might think, well, you know, if I
don't warm up, I'm, I'm going to be stiff.
My, my joints are going to ache.
I, you know, pick up a heavy load and suddenly I feel like I'm going to break apart.
What is it that you've talked about there that would be helping with some of with that sort of
sensation?
Obviously I'm not a physio, I'm not a doctor, I don't really know anything about that kind of stuff.
I understand that exercise has a pain relieving effect, so maybe there's something going on there,
but I, I don't know enough to comment intelligently.
You know, I think that's that's one of those questions that you kind of got to ask a physio really.
So then in the context of, say, a squat.
So say someone's doing a heavy squat and they don't warm up and they pick up A5 Rep Max and they
perform that squat and they barely completed.
They feel weak, they feel like they're going to tumble over.
Is there anything sort of happening there that you can comment on as to why maybe someone might feel
weaker in a heavy lift like that without warming up?
So obviously we described how the kind of temperature related factor and the PAP and the paper facts
could all increase instantaneous strength.
So essentially that would be one of the sort of underlying physiological reasons for that.
You might also have psychological reasons for it.
You know, it might just be extremely scary.
And of course, when we talk about, you know, MOTI recruitment, we've always got this model of the
psychobiological model of fatigue.
If you're dealing with emotions while you're trying to do an exercise, you've got less capacity to
produce motor unit equipment because some of your perception of effort capacity is being devoted
towards dealing with those emotions.
So if you're scared or feeling wobbly or any of those things that are uncomfortable, discomforting
sensations, you are going to be reducing your capacity to produce central motor command as a result
of feeling those things.
So it's kind of almost a self fulfilling prophecy, I think in in some ways coordination wise.
Is it something that is, you know, does it help us to work up a series of loads to get to our
particular weight?
I think it probably does.
But again, that's outside of my remit as well because you're now starting to go into motor learning
territory.
And interestingly, that body of literature is is absolutely gigantic.
So, you know, you'd want to ask somebody specialized in motor learning and say to them, look, I'm
trying to do a really complex, difficult, heavy, high effort task.
Does it help me to work up a series of steps to get to that load before actually doing the test
weight?
If so, why does that happen?
And maybe they'd have an answer, maybe they wouldn't.
I don't know.
I suspect they probably wouldn't.
I don't think it's the kind of motor learning task that gets studied.
But yeah, that that would be definitely something worth, you know, thinking.
I feel like it would be more likely the because I'm trying trying to differentiate here.
Is it load or is it the complexity of of the movement and the the skill specificity and?
Well, I think you could test that by just asking yourself how long does it take you to warm up for
something like a leg press where you've got the ability.
Yeah, exactly.
Compared with the squat, my experience is that it takes probably about five times as long tournament
for a squat than it does tournament for a leg press.
So I think it's the combination of the, the load and the and the complexity and the difficulty of
the moon.
Incidentally, I find it a lot faster tournament for a deadlift than I do for a squat.
And I suspect that again, is because the squat is just so much more capable of hurting you if it
goes wrong.
Maybe that's, that's a bit of a kind of a generic statement, but because people do get hurt doing
deadlifts, but you, you know, the barbell is maybe, maybe, maybe that's not the right way to
perceive it.
Maybe it's the fact that when we do a squat, we're balancing a barbell on our back and that is
fundamentally perceived as more threatening by the by the brain.
You know, even though maybe people would say, oh, no, no, people get damaged, people get hurt doing
their this much more often they get hurt doing squats.
Maybe that's true.
Maybe that's true, but the brain doesn't see it that way because you can just drop the bomb at any
point as far as the brain is concerned, you know, that's a that's an exit strategy, whereas A squat,
you can't do that.
So maybe the brain perceives the squats more terrifying.
I don't know.
I don't know.
You've talked about warming up the muscle, that being muscle specific and talked about like aerobic
exercise helping achieve that.
Can one achieve that through doing like the actual exercises of the workout as opposed to doing
aerobic exercise?
Well, that that's not really a question, because from a physiological point of view, if you drop the
weight lower than the threshold at which the muscle is hitting vascular occlusion, you're doing
aerobic exercise.
Yep.
OK, so let's say, I guess what I'm trying to get at here is if you look at a standard way, people
are warming up, right?
I'd say most commonly people are probably going to do, let's say two to three warm up sets.
They'll probably do the first set with empty bar, basically no load.
Then they'll do a second set with maybe let's say about 50% of the working weight.
And then they might do a third set with 70% of the working weight and maybe they're doing 8
repetitions each they're give or take, right?
I look at that and I think, well, you probably haven't achieved the PAP effect.
You haven't, probably.
Done the muzzle temperature effect either.
And this is a really interesting point, because the reality is that most common approaches to
warming up don't achieve anything.
No, that's what it's.
From perhaps a feeling of what's the right word, comfort with the exercise.
And actually, I don't think that's unimportant.
You know I.
Think what we were just talking about with the squat.
What we were just talking about with the squat, it's like if you've got, if you're uncomfortable
because you've jumped too far up to the work weight, then yes, you're going to have worrying
sensations that are going to, you know, kind of stop you from achieving high levels of recruitment.
So yes, that's that's an issue.
But fundamentally, if we go back to the starting kind of physiological issues, muscle temperature,
PAP and Pape, but no, most warmups are not achieving any of those things.
Yeah.
So presumably they're just affecting perception of effort, or that would be the the main.
Just affecting comfort with the exercise that they're going to do.
And that degree of comfort as that we've just been exploring is probably more related to the way in
which the brain perceives the exercise you're doing, Like sort of knee extensions or leg curls or,
you know, kind of something on a machine that's relatively stable.
You probably aren't going to be feeling particularly nervous about the exercise with your work
equate, at least not after you've done a couple of reps with a meaningful weight.
So to go back to muscle temperature then, so how much exercise, how much aerobic exercise must one
do to achieve that muscle warming effect?
So you're looking at about 15 minutes really.
And it's as we've said, it's muscle specific.
So, you know, realistically, even when people do do their kind of treadmill walks before they do
their exercise, most people aren't getting anything for the upper body that's even remotely close to
what they would need to achieve.
So, you know, I think in interestingly, and again, just to come back to something we talked about,
we're talking about this from an injury prevention point of view.
We're not really talking about needing unless you're, unless you're a kind of athlete competing in a
fast movement sport, you're not really going to need to do this for performance for sorry for
stimuli related factors.
You're literally just talking about doing it from an injury prevention point of view.
But yeah, most people who perhaps go in the gym to do a upper body workout or an exercise workout
with upper body exercises in it are probably going to be not getting the injury prevention benefits
of a warm up from anything that they're doing.
Now a question I've thought about before and I don't know what I feel about this because I can see
he go either way would be what about a short sauna before a training session?
Exactly.
I mean, that's, that's going to get you the muscle temperature potentially.
I mean, I again, this is not something I I particularly looked at.
But you know, if you look at the sauna literature and you discover that it does raise muscle
temperature, I guess it probably does, then, you know, you could, you could argue that that would be
valid.
I don't know how.
Again, I'm literally don't know what dosages and temperatures or anything would be relevant.
All I can do is point to the literature that I've looked at, which is that warm baths do tend to
have that effect.
So.
You know, how long do they have the bath for to have that effect?
I would have to go and look.
I don't know, but I don't think it's ridiculous amount of time.
So if someone was listening to this and they've been like, oh man, I've been doing their two, three
sets of eight reps lightweight and sounds like I'm not doing a whole lot out of that.
If they wanted to level up their warm up, I guess we've covered a couple of things there.
You could do the the muscle temperature thing using a exercise or is hopefully doing that for the
muscles you're going to use in that workout.
What are some other ways they could potentially level up their warm up?
So yeah, leaving aside, you know, doing a muscle temperature warming kind of practice or whether
that's most likely and some kind of aerobic exercise that involves the muscles you're going to train
with.
Obviously you can keep the muscle warm after that by using tracksuit or something like that.
Or you may be depending on what environment you're working out in.
But leaving aside that, it's really just the post activation potentiation effect to the moment,
which is, you know, essentially going to be generated by single Max effort repetitions.
So really what I would suggest is that once you've done your kind of sequence of set increments that
you want to do to get you to your work weight, you drop the weight down slightly and do a sort of
single Max effort repetition or a high effort repetition.
And that'll that'll basically do it in the context of barbell exercises.
I would not do that in the context of barbell exercises like bench press and squat and deadlift.
I would do a totally different exercise.
So I would do like a Max effort vertical jump for the squat and do something like a medicine ball
throat for the bench press and deadlift.
You might do a kettlebell swing or something like that.
So because there's just literally no point in starting to mess around with the barbell weight to do
single effort repetitions in that situation, it doesn't work.
So a bit for machines and other kind of exercises are much more controlled than you can do that
single effort.
Something that what you've just said there that makes apparent is there's actually no necessity to
do the actual exercise for your warm up.
No, it's not specific.
I mean, of course all of this is muscle specific.
You know, the muscle temperature is muscle specific.
It's not exercise.
The PAP and the paper effects are muscle specific.
They're localized effects.
Got nothing to do with the brain really.
Yeah.
So except for that sort of confidence rehearsal thing we were talking about with this squat, sure.
Apart from that, then you don't theoretically need to do that exercise for warming up.
No, which is one of those interesting points that you've raised in conversation with me before.
I'm going to steal your Thunder shamelessly, which is that if you do a sequence of different
exercises for the same muscle, and potentially warming up across those three different exercises is
not necessary, you could actually go from one to the other.
Yeah, and that's a criticism I hear a lot in of full body plans where people will be like, I
couldn't possibly do that.
You did a warm up so much, how could you do 20 different exercises?
You'll need to do 60 sets.
And like you've just said there, well actually maybe one thing you could do if you're doing say two
or three exercises per muscle is that first exercise.
And the way I would normally do it myself is I would do a couple of warm up sets for that first
exercise and generally I either don't need any for those late exercises or I will just do one with a
lightweight.
Just make sure everything feels good and then go.
So it doesn't need to actually be more time consuming than if you were to do multiple sets of one
exercise.
Yeah, absolutely.
And I think, and I think really what's happened is that people have looked at things like squats
where you need 25 minutes to warm up to your work weight if you're doing heavy load.
And they've kind of extrapolated that and say we need to do that same practice for biceps curls or
you know, kind of machine overhead presses and stuff like that.
And it's almost certainly not true part, you know, partly because as I've described, we're not
really getting any of the injury prevention mechanisms from the things that we're doing, you know,
in the in the squat sort of warm up.
Those are confidence and movement related practice things that are essential, but they're not
actually doing the muscle strain injury prevention thing that, you know, we've been describing.
Maybe you could argue that they are actually doing a very profound injury prevention thing because
they're stopping you from hurting yourself by doing the exercise wrong in the work weight zone
because you've, you know, worked your way up in the movement practice and and confidence to the
point where you can do the way.
And I'm speaking from experience here and exactly what this feels like.
So I think really it makes a lot of sense to essentially look at warmups through a slightly
different lens rather than just saying, you know, when we're warming up for a squat, we do it this
way because that's essentially essential.
Hang on a minute.
But those aren't really the ways in which you would reduce injury risk if you were starting from
scratch and planning a warm up with a machine exercise that is not requiring that steady progression
of confidence and and movement practice to get to the same place.
You know, actually if I'm planning an overhead press in a machine, then I'm doing a seated overhead
press in the machine.
Then what I really want to be doing is getting my arm muscles warm, delts warm, my back warm, and
then I want to be doing a PAP effect.
And by doing that, then I've potentially got a little bit more hypertrophy stimulus, maybe don't
know for sure.
And I've definitely got, you know, a PAP effect plus muscle temperature increase, which is going to
reduce my risk of a muscle strain injury, if that would even really be a problem in that scenario.
Is something like an elliptical?
Is that actually sufficient to warm up like the muscles in your arms and your back?
Like, is that actually if you're?
Using your arms, yes.
I mean, if you're just kind of resting them on the.
Passively holding it.
Yeah, that's not going to work.
So, you know, you've got to be proactively thinking about what you're trying to get out of the the
exercise.
And again, you know, what we're really doing here is we're only really talking about muscle strain
injury.
You know, people could say, well, what about tendinopathy?
What about, you know, sort of articulation issues?
You know, you could, you could kind of say, well, what about them?
I mean, until there's a literature base that can tell you how those, how those injuries happen and
how you can reduce the risk of them happening in a strength training context, I don't really have
any data to go with.
I mean, it's, I talk about muscle strain injury because that's, that's what we've got data for.
Can I ask how do you warm up in your workouts?
So at my age now, I don't have to do, I don't really spend any time doing free weight exercises
particularly.
So I'm basically going to be doing machine stuff.
And my approach is to I do AI, do my aerobic exercise, warm up.
And then I do basically probably only two or three sets of either singles or double s with the
machine I'm going to do for each machine.
And I, I rushed through them.
So I will sit, let's describe the the C to the VED press because that's generally the thing that I
kind of will start with because that's my weakest, that sort of lift.
So I will go to the machine, I'll sit down and I will immediately put it to about 50% of the weight
I'm going to use approximately, and I'll do one or two repetitions with that.
All I'm doing when I do that is just making sure that there's nothing fundamentally wrong with me.
That's appeared overnight since I last did the exercise.
Now, at my age, that is a real possibility I could find that I sit down on the machine and something
really just screams at me and it's because I've slept on the wrong side of the bed or, you know,
I've just, you know, kind of done something that I shouldn't have done.
So I do.
That's literally a test.
It's like, does anything feel horrible?
And then I put the weight up again to usually about sort of 1020% below what I'm planning to do as
well.
And I do the same thing again.
I just test.
Does it feel horrible?
Does it feel OK?
And if that feels OK, I'll then usually move up to my work weight or relatively close to that and
I'll do a single higher repetition.
And then I'll wait a minute or so and then I'll do my work set.
And that's, that's basically going to get, I get there in about a minute.
It doesn't take me any time at all.
And if I'm doing sort of single sets, which is what I normally do again at my age, I'm not trying to
add any more.
So particularly just trying to keep what I've got and I'll just go and move to a different machine
and do the same thing again.
I do tend to always do that practice even though I might be doing multiple sort of overlapping
muscle groups.
So I might go from, I might do a rare, I might also do a pull down and do some read out stuff,
whatever.
I will always do that process because I'm actually doing the warm up to test that my body isn't
broken.
That's what I'm using the format process for.
Other people might use the process for different, but that's what I'm doing.
I'm just making sure nothing's going to go.
Wrong.
That's an interesting point, what you just said there, that other people might be using it for other
purposes because there are in fact other purposes you could use it for.
So one thing I do sometimes, not all the time, and sometimes is I use my warm up for a similar.
So actually I integrate like classes into my warm up.
So the first exercise I do of the day, so I'll do maybe you know, 10 or 15 minutes walking or
whatever, and then the first exercise I might do one or or two kind of warm up sets.
Again, just kind of feeling it out.
Usually there's one set to be honest.
And then I go out to my five year Max and I'll just perform a number of singles with that.
And for me that'll be, and I often for that exercise, I won't even do more than just those singles.
I'll just do those singles and then I'm moving to the next exercise for that muscle.
And so that's achieved the path effect for that following exercise.
So, you know, I guess I'm trying to get something, something different out of it.
I do want to circle back around because I know people are asking this question.
You said you do your whole little sequence in only a minute or two, so people will be asking how
long do I need to rest between warm up sets?
It depends how many reps you're doing.
I mean, I literally do one or two repetitions with each and I'm doing two or three sets with
sequential weights and I don't feel any fatigue particularly when I'm doing that.
So I just bash straight through them because, again, the purpose of me doing them, apart from the
final PAP Rep, the purpose of me doing them is testing that there's no problem.
Yeah.
And I've talked to a number of other elderly lifters.
I classify myself as an elderly lifter at this point.
We kind of all say the same thing.
It's like you do not go jumping straight into, I mean, like I couldn't do what you're describing,
for example, where you might go from a road to a pull down or something like that and just bang
straight into your work.
I just would never do that because I could literally find that my entire back just lights up like a
Christmas tree.
And when I, when I pull, I mean, I just don't know that's going to happen.
You know, I've done, I've in the last year I've done something like that twice.
In fact, even with all the precautions I take.
You know, I've been in a situation where I've pulled, I mean, back is my problem because I spent so
much time doing one arm chins and heavyweight pull ups that I think I got maybe a couple of issues
as a result of doing that.
And now sometimes I can pull really, really hard.
I mean, I can Max pull down machines out relatively easily.
And I, and I, it just twinges and I just, my whole back lights up and I'm walking around like
Quasimodo for the next couple of days.
And, you know, just, that's just what happens, I think.
And so I have to be super careful.
And I think a lot of us older lifters are, we kind of just want to make sure that we haven't seized
up overnight and created an issue that's going to come to light halfway through a set.
So after that final one or two repetitions you do and and that's with let's say like Max effort
that's achieving that PAP effect even though they're only a single or double.
Would you wait then before you're working set?
How long would you wait for that was?
So yeah, if I just go by field.
So if, if my if my my final pap Rep is is like with a sort of lower weight.
I mean, I'm not super specific about this.
And the reason I'm not super specific is because I, so I don't take my training as seriously as
people who are trying to achieve a particular, you know, kind of goal that they've got in mind.
I'm just trying to hang on to everything that I've got or as much as what I've got as I can.
So I'm literally thinking about a maintenance program where I've got a high variety of exercises and
I'm just trying to hit single sets with a high enough level of effort to keep what I've got.
But there's no capacity for me to grow my age, you know, So I'm kind of looking at things from a
different perspective.
Also, the gym is not my life.
You know, I've got an entirely different life outside of the gym that is much more important to me.
So you know, that's just, I will just go through and I'll do a final pap Rep and if it doesn't feel
fatiguing because it was maybe a little bit lighter, then I'll just give it 30 seconds and I'll go
into the work.
So if I've done a work repetition, then maybe I'll leave it a little bit longer.
But I do get questions when people will say to me, you know, oh, I'm doing this warm up and they're
describing they're doing like 10 reps with this way and then they're waiting a couple of minutes
then doing another 10 reps and like, what are you even trying to achieve?
There's nothing in that, that physiological matrix that we've worked through that is this is
stimulated by doing 10 reps with 50% of your work way that it does nothing.
It doesn't get you the temperature increase, It doesn't get you the PAP increase, doesn't get the
PAP increase.
What's it achieving?
It does nothing.
I do think that the general approach to warps is probably is probably quite wrong, yeah.
I think that's a good point.
I do think most of the warm ups you look at, they don't seem to be doing really anything and in fact
you could argue based on what they are achieving you could just probably skip the warm ups entirely
like it doesn't.
It's probably just creating fatigue that they've then got to sit and wait out before they can move
to the next warm up, set and then sit and wait.
The fatigue from that and does it really actually enhance performance or reduce injury risk?
Yeah, it's not hitting any of the three bases that we've described.
So, you know, maybe it's not doing anything apart from that confidence thing again, which is, you
know, maybe not even that necessary if they're working with machine exercises.
I really think that is so exercise specific.
I mean, my obviously this is just end of 1 anecdote, but I come from a background where Walmarts
were emphasized.
We did a lot of warm ups.
Everything you would do, you know, you do three sets of warm ups, you do your 8 to 10 like you've
just described.
And, you know, I was always told, like, you have to do this injury prevention, you know, CNS
priming, all this stuff.
Yeah.
And then only over the last couple of years have I started to kind of question, do I need these
warmups?
And over the last maybe two years, I'm at a point now where I don't know at least 50% of the
exercises I do, I don't warm up at all.
And like you described there, like the first exercise for that muscle, I will.
And then often I won't really do anything.
And especially if it's a curl, a machine exercise, stuff that, you know, I squat or whatever, I
will.
But most machine exercise, I mean leg extensions, I still do because I don't hurt my knees.
But apart from that, a leg curl, I don't.
And I've been doing this for a while now and I don't feel any worse for it.
I haven't gotten injured.
I don't feel anybody pains.
I don't feel like my performance is dropped by any means.
And it's, it's just, it's been like, it's like dogma.
And it's like, you have to do this.
It's like, well, hang on, do you test it out?
And I'm not sure why we have to do this.
Yeah.
I mean I think the closest I get to not doing a warp is probably a re adult fly.
So I know exactly what weight I use on the re adult fly and the machine, the gym that I go to.
And I will usually just go there and I will do a single set of either one or two reps with about 80%
of that weight.
And then I'll just literally move the selector to my to my work weight and I'll just go straight
into doing my work set.
So I literally sit down bang and do 2 reps with a 80% and then I go straight into our work set and
that's it.
That's the closest I get.
But that's because I've I've never had an issue with rear adult flies in any, any point in my life.
It's is, is this the it's the kind of the rows and the and the pull downs that scare me.
Really.
That's the scenario where I've kind of hurt myself in the past.
But yeah, I think what you're describing is, is, is very interesting.
I mean, before this podcast, I said to you, one of the concerns I have about answering the question
when people say to me, what should I do as a warm up?
I say, well, what I'm going to do is describe what I do and then you can decide what you do.
I can't tell you what to do because the problem about warmups is that how a community regards
warmups as being integral to injury prevention.
So if I tell you to do something and then you get hurt, then you can then come back and yell at me
and tell me it's my fault.
I'm not going to tell you how to do that because I don't want to put myself in that situation,
having that responsibility.
So I can tell you what I do.
And if you, you know, find that useful, then hopefully that is useful.
But ultimately I can't give you a, another sort of a, a distinctive recipe to follow because that
then puts me at risk of you blaming me for you getting hurt in the future.
So and you said to me you didn't think that other people are that smart.
I just said I don't think that people, influencers think about the consequence of what they say
necessarily.
Which I interpreted as you tell me that they don't think that much.
That was, that was, yeah, that was the interpretation.
For what it's worth, what I tell my groups to do as far as warm ups is I say a, this is super
individual.
I say some people may feel like they don't need any and some people may feel like they need 3 or 4
or maybe even more if we're doing something like a squad.
And so I say ultimately it is up to you.
In general, I recommend one to two.
That would be 1, which would be very, very light, nothing on the bar, just make sure everything
works like your little test.
And then the second one would be to achieve that PAP effect.
And so that could be a higher load or could be a Max effort.
But I'm more than happy to say if you don't feel like you did any, don't do any.
So I do think there's, you know, individualization there.
And I don't think we need to be so prescriptive to say everyone must do for warm up sets or
whatever.
Yeah, obviously it depends what you're trying to achieve as well.
Yeah.
I think really the important factor I think that's come out to this kind of conversation is that the
kind of the very mainstream approach to warming up, which is where you, you know, you do like 10
reps with a lightweight and then 10 reps with a slightly or 8 reps with a slightly light heavier
weight and then five and then three and then two.
And you work your way up in a pyramid form to your work weight.
That really does nothing really physiologically sort of valid.
There's no physiological mechanism to explain what that is doing, you know, even if you want to go
down the route to saying, well, OK, well, how do I, how am I supposed to warm up for a, a back squat
exercise?
Well, even then, yes, you would work up through a series of weights, but you don't need to do 10
repetitions at any point.
You know, you're talking two or three repetitions with each of your increments.
You know, and there's no sense in doing 10.
There's no scenario in which 10 is a good idea.
From the mechanisms that we described, you know, we want muscle temperature increases.
Well, that's going to be about your aerobic warm up.
It's not going to be or, or whatever else you do.
It's not going to be about the exercise specific one pap and Pape, both of those are going to be
about the final thing you do just before you do your work.
Set everything up to that point.
The only reason you do it is confidence and make, in my case, my age, making sure everything still
works, confidence and movement practice.
As you pointed out, if you're dealing with machine exercises where you don't need any real
confidence booster or movement practice, you can jump really quickly through those.
As I've described, I jump really quickly through my rear delt fly because it just feels so
ridiculously easy to kind of do the movement.
And I don't feel I need any kind of confidence because I feel like the exercises would have been
safe for me.
So yeah, I think it individuality is that is that kind of confidence and movement practice side.
The other stuff is actually got nothing to do with the exercise specific warm up at all.
I don't.
Want to beat this topic to death, but I do have one final question for you and then we'll wrap up
over warmups.
What's happening there?
Is anything different that we should talk about there?
So this is one of those things where again, I just have to say there could be something really
interesting here or there could be nothing here.
What is probably happening with an over warm up is where we use a heavier than your weight than
we're going to use for the for the work set is is almost certainly just a change in the way the
brain perceives the effort required to do the movement.
If that is the case, then what you're going to get is an increase in motion recruitment for the
movement that you're going to do, which is fantastic.
But I don't know whether that is the case, you know, so somebody needs to go and do a test to see if
performance is increased by doing a single heavier load.
But they need to use a control group that isn't just have no overwhelm up.
They need to do a single Max effort wrap with the same weight or a lighter weight to create a Pap
effect as well.
So you need to, it needs to control for the Pap effect.
So what you need to do if you want to construct an experiment to test this and you could actually
test this yourself.
I mean, there's no reason why you can't test this yourself.
You would do a, you would fix your address period between the what we call conditioning contraction
and the main set.
So you would say I'm going to do a single repetition either with, you know, my work rate plus 10%,
or I'm going to do a single repetition with my work rate -10% both with maximal efforts.
And then I'm going to wait 3 minutes or two minutes better, probably 2 minutes.
And then I'm going to do my work set.
If the over warm up is beneficial for reasons additional to the PAP, then you will get a superior
effect on your work set.
If it is basically just a PAP, then you'll get the same effect as the control group which used your
work weight -10% instead of your work weight plus 10%.
I just wrote a study design for somebody if they're interested in testing that, but that would be.
And The thing is, some people report that it does seem to have a beneficial effect.
I played around with it about six months to a year ago and I initially I thought it might help and
then I realized it wasn't really having a beneficial effect for me.
But other people's mileage may varies.
Until somebody goes and does some work on it, I don't think we're going to know whether it on
average works for most people most of the time, or if it just doesn't really work for most.
People, my two cents would be for most people who are trying to do the over warm up, it's probably
meaning that they are getting that Papp effect and most likely the normal warm up is not achieving
that Papp effect.
Yeah, exactly.
Yeah, I think you're probably right there.
I suspect that it's it's just creating a Papp effect where one wasn't there previously.
So, but yeah, as I say, in the event that it does create an effect, it's almost certainly going to
be this change in the perception of the load and the heaviness of the load, which therefore makes it
feel easier.
And therefore you can then push your effort perception to your normal maximum level.
And actually now you're coinciding with a high level of.
Whether that happens is entirely speculative, I do not know.
That's it, That's our warm up episode done.
Thank you guys for joining us.
Hopefully you'll join us again next week.