Episode: 036 Dorian Yates, Maximalist Programming, and Neuromechanical Matching
URL: https://open.spotify.com/episode/0ZCsJkVgDk5sIC9zCZiBBO
Published: 2026-01-26
================================================================================

Thank you for joining us for another episode of Hypertrophy past and present.
And today we have the long-awaited During Yates program.
I've had so many people asking us to assess 1 of Dorian's plans.
Oh, we said, hey, let's, let's just do it.
Let's just jump in and get it done.
Now for some of you guys who are wanting us to look at the Blood and Guts plan, we will do that in
the future, but I wanted to start with one of Dorian's earlier plans.
So this is actually from before 1985, supposedly before Dorian was enhanced, which I think is quite
interesting.
And it was a plan that he was using before he was competing in obviously winning Olympia shows.
So I think this is a cool little bit of history.
He actually followed this plan for several years actually before he changed it up.
And that's actually something that I think is quite interesting about a lot of Dorian Yates plans
just in general, is he actually stuck to a lot of the same exercises often for years.
And he has been quite vocal about the lack of necessity to change up exercises that are working.
So I quite like that because a lot of the time there's this idea that we need to change exercises
every four weeks or 8 weeks to have along.
And we look at someone like Dorian and obviously this is NF one, but you know, there doesn't seem to
be a, a need for that.
And obviously we've talked about why that might be.
Now, before I jump into this plan, I'm not here alone, Chris, you're with me.
Do you wanna say good day?
Say anything before I jump into it?
I'm indeed here for the episode, so yes, great to be here.
Jake, how are you doing?
I'm doing very well, thank you.
So Dorian Yates here we go pre 1985 plan, this was an AB split.
So he did this, this routine three times per week, alternating these two workouts.
And I know some people are gonna be happy about this.
This was actually a effectively, it was a torso limbs split.
I know that's a split that's gotten a fair bit of attention over the last year or so.
And a lot of people that really enjoy it.
Personally, it's not my favorite Plan B split, but I know a lot of people do love it.
So I'm sure there's a lot of people celebrating hearing that.
So two different workouts, workout A workout B, the torso.
In fact, before I jump into the torso workout, what he did do is he started each workout or each
exercise with one warm up set and then he went into the working set.
So I'm not going to mention the warm up set every time.
There was a warm up set for each exercise and each, I'm pretty sure every single exercise here.
Yeah, every exercise was done for sets of eight repetitions.
And he suggested increasing the load when that set of eight became one Rep in reserve.
So that's the structure for all of the of both the workouts.
So I'm just gonna talk about the exercise selection now.
So workout A, which was essentially A torso routine, was a flaccid bench press for two sets, an
incline press for two sets, and then incline flies for one set.
So that is his chest work.
And then we've got close grip chin ups for two sets and then a bent over barbell row for two sets
and a deadlift for two sets.
So that was his back work.
And then we've got behind the neck press for two sets, side latter raise for one set and a bent over
like a rear del flyer.
He called them bent laterals for one set.
So that was his delt work.
And then we've got 2 sets of crunches and two sets of hanging leg raises.
Workout B.
The limbs workout was squat.
Now this is the only exercise he did for 1/3 set.
So three sets of squat and then two sets of hat squat, 2 sets of leg curl, 2 sets of standing calf
phrases, 2 sets of barbell curls, and then one set of one arm preacher curl, 2 sets of a triceps
pushed down and then one set of line triceps extensions.
Now the format, in case you guys couldn't work it out from listening, was he was essentially aiming
to do 3 exercises per larger muscle group and then two exercises per smaller muscle group.
The exception there that he said was for quads where he just had those two squat variations and
that's why he added an additional set for the the squat.
But everything else he's looking at adding and essentially doing two to three exercises for one to
two sets per muscle group.
What do you think of that, Chris?
So obviously the exercise selection here is the really interesting stuff.
And it's interesting because we're getting multiple exercises for the same body parts in the same
workout.
So this is ultimately the the kind of the really interesting thing.
It's like he's not just doing a single exercise for each muscle group.
He's actually doing multiple exercises even though he's actually doing multiple sets for those
exercise.
And he's able to do that, of course, because he is doing a split.
So, you know, he's doing this kind of torso limb split.
So he's able to do, you know, more exercises relatively easily, but he's also able to do more sets
for those exercises.
So we've got here then essentially you've got a flat bench press followed by the incline press.
So I'm guessing he's probably going to be using slightly different grip widths in those scenarios.
Probably with the bench press, flat bench, he's probably doing a wider grip.
I'm guessing with the incline, he's probably doing a slight narrow grip.
So he's kind of getting sort of more, you know, sternal, maybe some coastal in the OR probably some
coastal in the flat bench.
And then he's getting more curricular in the incline press and he's actually doing some flies as
well.
So I would say that the the wide grip bench plus flies would be a little bit kind of essentially
just adding volume for exactly the same muscle fibers.
But fundamentally he's got, you know, multiple exercises there.
I mean, obviously in terms of putting those incline flies last, he's actually, you know, choosing to
use a smaller muscle mass exercise later on, which is going to give him better recruitment.
So in many ways you could say, well, it would be better to do a single joint fly exercise after the
multi joint pressing because you actually are able to keep the levels of recruitment high rather
than allowing them to drift downwards as happens if you just carry on doing multiple sets of the
same big muscle mass exercise.
So just literally in the first three exercises, I'm seeing so much cool stuff.
It's really that's.
That's an interesting point you made then.
I think we touched on it last week in a podcast about the ability of using either a single, single
joint or using that smaller, you know, muscle mass exercise at the end of a series and how you've
just said there that'll allow one to maintain high levels of Modi energy recruitment.
And we told it has some people depending on the workout plan, you could put that at the start if
you're using that for the purpose of increasing Modi energy recruitment in that given muscle.
So I just wanted to clarify that because some people might be looking at this and being like, well,
hang on, haven't you guys said put that at the start in the past?
Maybe we have in the context of using it for that particular purpose here.
He's using an incline fly, not a, a flat fly.
Can you just speak to what difference that would make?
So the thing about the incline is it depends quite a lot on how inclined it actually is.
Ultimately as you start to incline, you are going to start prioritising the delts instead of the
pecs.
But if it's a relatively shallow incline, that effect is quite small really in inclined pressing, we
tend to keep the grip width a little bit narrower.
And I would argue you really want it as narrow as possible as well, not a not as narrow as possible,
but certainly shoulder width.
So you want it in the size to a plane.
So and that really makes the exercise very effective for the clavicular peg.
And then if you make it a very steep indline, it starts to shift it towards the anterior duct.
But he's still going to get a decent amount of clavicular peg.
But with the with the incline flies, you're actually kind of starting in the transverse plane as
you're on a flat.
And as you kind of raise up, you start to move more and more and more towards the frontal plane, not
the size tool.
So it starts to look a little bit kind of like middle adult and anterior adult involvement.
But ultimately a lot depends on the exact incline.
So I would guess if the incline is relatively shallow, it would still be kind of more or less the
same thing as the flat bench.
It would still be mostly the three divisions of the PEC.
You might get a little bit of anterior adult extra in there, but I wouldn't have expected it to be
too much.
But again, the problem with changing planes of motion and going in between them.
So we tend to talk a lot about scapular plane.
So people are like, OK, well, I've, I've got, I'm starting out with my frontal plane and out to the
side.
I'm going to compare that with a shoulder width kind of grip size to a plane.
And people are mostly happy that halfway between those two is a scapular plane.
And it's kind of like a recognized concept.
In contrast, if you start on a flat bench and you're doing transverse plane pushing upwards and then
you start to incline, you're then moving closer towards the frontal plane from that transverse plane
position.
And that isn't a recognized kind of thing.
It's like we don't have a name like scapula that we do for the kind of sort of equivalent between
sizetal and frontal.
So, but as you are going from transverse to frontal, you will start to gradually introduce muscles
that would be more accustomed to working in the frontal plane, which is of course the middle belt
and the anterior delt.
So you're just going to get a little a bit of those coming in.
But as I say, unless the incline is really steep, I wouldn't expect it to be very much.
Yeah, that makes sense.
So going on, moving on with exercise selection, so chess work, you're saying you're pretty happy
with what we're seeing here chess wise?
I just think it's really interesting the way you structured that because as I say, you've got three
exercises, two, the first two of which are definitively doing very different things.
And the third is a, an exercise that is essentially performing another physiological function, which
is to allow higher levels of recruitment, even though he's already done four sets for that entire
muscle.
So physiologically it's really, really interesting design of that arrangement of exercises.
The next three exercises, then our kind of back exercises and we've got close grip chins.
So we're getting a sagittal plane pulling exercise, which is really cool because we're going to get
a lot of posterior dealt there.
We're going to get a lot of thoracic lat and then it pairs that with a bent over Bob a row, which is
very transverse plane.
Now it is fundamentally different.
It is getting a lot of different that kind of sort of stimulus, but it's not my, it wouldn't have
been my preferred.
I would have probably gone with a wide grip pull down.
But ultimately that's kind of what he's chosen to do.
And then the deadlift I think is probably not the best idea at this point.
I think really for me a close grip pull down, wide grip pull down plus a a Kelso shrug probably
would have been my preferred selection.
But obviously I mean that selection of three exercises is going to get some similar coverage.
But I think lumbar lats maybe you're going to be over relying on the on on the kind of the secondary
effects of the barbell row and the secondary effects of the deadlift not really being primary target
primarily targeting that area.
They will use that muscle region a lot, but they won't be as targeted as a wide grip pull down would
be.
It is interesting having the deadlift there on that day.
Obviously this is the more torso day, so he's got his lower body stuff on the upper body.
The thing is when you kind of, when you look at deadlifters and, or even just people deadlifting,
there is a very, very strong tendency for people to fall into either backlifting camps or leg
lifting camps.
And obviously anyone who looks at Dorian is going to know without even needing to do any analysis,
it is a backlifter.
So you know, it's just obviously that's a strong point.
So I think you know, having the deadlift in there, all you would need to do is put it on a little
bit of a block and immediately would become a very, very back kind of target dictiles in his
particular case.
And I'm guessing that's probably what he did.
The thing I dislike most about this torso, not this specific torso limb split, but a torso limb
split in general, is there's always going to be some degree of overlap.
And generally that split is done as a four times per week plan.
So the torso limbs day off, torso limbs day off.
And what I like here is he's done it with a day, a rest day in between each workout.
So even if the is overlap, which it clearly is some overlap, for example with the triceps or you
know, with the deadlift, he's still got that day off in between those workouts and he's not doing
any more than two sets.
So we're assuming that there should be recovery by the time he's there hitting that next workout,
even if there's some overlap.
It's a similar thing we saw with the Mike Minster plan where Minster was doing that two way split,
but he was doing a workout day off, workout day off.
And I think that's a really interesting way of using these two way split plans is having that rest
day in between.
Yeah, no, absolutely.
I mean that's, I mean that's just kind of managing the, the kind of the the fatigue that's building
up with doing this kind of volume.
In terms of the next couple of exercises, I think it's probably again not my preferred kind of
starting point for delt work.
I mean, I really liked behind the neck press.
I think that's a great starting point.
Probably relatively similar involvement of anterior and middle delt, but then he's going into
lateral razors.
So he's kind of adding, OK, fine, an extra amount of middle delt work, which is again single joint.
So you're going to get more.
Doing the same thing he was doing with the chest.
Same thing he was doing with the chest, which is great, but I feel like my anterior delts are
getting neglected a little bit.
And then when I go to the final exercise, which is kind of leaning forward laterals, so essentially
rear delt flies.
Yeah, that again feels like I'm now really doubling back on what I did before with the close grip
chin, the close grip and the bent over rose.
I'm like why do you need so much rear dealt work and why haven't you got any anterior dealt work?
So are you not satisfied with the the bench?
The incline press.
Well, this is what I'm coming back to.
So when I, when I look at this program in its entirety, and so my, my first pass of the analysis is,
is, is largely ignoring what I know about the lifter.
I mentioned obviously Dorian's tendency probably to be a backlifter in the deadlift because I think
it's very relevant.
But my first pass is just kind of going, what would this programme do for the average person who I
don't know anything about their individual leverages.
But when I get to the end of the programme and I look at it or at the end of this workout A and I
look at it, I go, I can clearly see that whoever has written this programme is probably, and if they
know how they respond to exercise, which is almost, you know, 100% certainty in this case, you would
say they're probably going to be someone who's anterior dealt, probably does a lot of work in
pressing exercises because there isn't much specific anterior delt work.
It's relying on the pressing at the beginning that what would we would look at as predominantly PEC
work.
He's probably getting a lot of anterior delt stimulus from that and as a result doesn't feel the
need to specify any further kind of work in that area.
Whereas there's a lot of middle delt work by contrast.
So I would look at this and go, this is someone who's identified that they need a lot of middle and
probably posterior delt work in order to get the physique that they want now, whereas anterior adult
they don't need to focus so much on because it automatically gets involved.
The same thing you could argue for the lumbar lats.
It's just like this lifter knows that anything that they do when they pull something, they
immediately get lumbar lat activation.
They don't, and you can just look at the guy from the back and know that, but you know it's going to
be something that they don't need to worry about.
So this workout a if, if say this was being written for as a generic plan, not for Dorian, but just
for as a generic lifter, then what are those tweaks you would make?
Like immediately we've mentioned the deadlift.
So in my mind it makes more sense to put that bent lateral the the readout fly up with the back
work.
It's just not necessary.
It's just not necessary.
So you could, you could do so if you go from the top, you would have your flat bench, you'd have
your narrow grip incline press and then you'd have your, you wouldn't do an incline fly, you'd
probably do a flat bench fly for that third exercise.
Then you'd go into, as I said before, close grip, pull down or chin, wide grip, pull down or chin.
And then your third exercise there would you could you could do a read out fly as you said you could
do.
Well, if you swap those, so you've got the close grip chin, you could turn that into a frontal
plane, pull down or pull up, Yeah.
And then that transverse plane row, you turn that into a sagittal row and where I'd say, well, a lot
further ahead.
Yeah, so same idea.
So either either a narrow grip pull down or or or a row is fine.
A wide grip pull down obviously, but I, I wouldn't go to the to the trouble of having that rear delt
fly in there because I know I'm getting it in the in the narrow grip row or pull down.
I would choose to have a, a, a Kelso shrug in there.
I think that makes a much bigger difference to someone's physique.
And maybe we're losing some of that with if we get rid of the deadlift.
Yeah, exactly.
And then and.
It still follows that same format of using a smaller muscle mass exercise because I really like
that.
I love that format of finishing that little Tri set for that muscle group with a smaller muscle mass
exercise.
No, it's great.
And then then what we can do is then we can look at the final set of exercises and we've got I love
the behind the neck press.
I think it's a great starting point.
I think ultimately the the side laterals isn't a bad choice, but I would want to do it last rather.
Than yeah, do it last and then put something in for the front delt in the middle.
And then I would want a front delt focused press in the middle and I would obviously look for
something probably in the overhead range of motion.
Now you can either do the behind the neck press partial out to the side, or you can do it as a size
to plane press, again as a partial overhead.
Either of those two options is finance.
Whichever is most comfortable, whichever is easier to set up in the gym.
The way I would program that, given how much load one is usually going to use with a behind the neck
compared to sagittal, usually someone will use a bit more load behind the neck if they've been doing
this exercise for a while.
I would do exactly what you mentioned there, the behind the neck to begin and then the next exercise
would be using that same load and I'd just be doing a partial, that top partial.
And that way you don't need to set up a new exercise, don't need to take too much load off.
I think that's the easiest way.
I agree.
I think that's the easiest way.
Even though it's nice to do different planes of motion, I think you're right.
I think just sitting in the same kind of apparatus and just changing the range of motion is probably
the easiest way of managing that.
Then as we said, the, the, the side laterals middle, they'll kind of focused exercise single join as
the final of the three.
And that will probably be, I think, a really solid kind of program that would work for most people.
Most of the time.
It wouldn't, it wouldn't be just geared towards one person's, you know, kind of strengths and
weaknesses as it were.
Yep, Yep, Yep.
It's.
I think that's a very nice routine there.
In terms of the second workout, the workout B, so here things are, you know, kind of different.
He's really doing a lot less exercise variety for for the for the lower body.
I don't see a lot of variety there at all.
I think that it's nowhere near as sophisticated as the upper body, that kind of excise selection.
I think that a barbell squat and a hack squat are literally doing exactly the same thing.
Not exactly exactly in terms of everything else that's working, but in terms of quads at least, it's
pretty much exactly the same thing.
Technically speaking, he's followed that format of having that slightly more kind of isolated
exercise second.
Yeah, if you like, but ultimately it's still a multi joint exercise.
So you know, it's not, it's not really doing what we want.
And you know, there's no knee extension, which is terrible.
I mean, that's that's really a huge problem for for most people who.
Are so off the bat if we just swap out that hack squat for leg extension.
Then, well, I would just, I would get rid of the barbell back squat because honestly, you know,
it's, it's always going to be harder and you know, kind of to fit into a workout when you've got to
spend so much time warming up.
So so you swap the hack squad and the barbell squad.
So the hack squad is now a 1 and then we now get rid of the barbell squad and make that a leg
extension.
Exactly.
And I think that would suddenly make things a lot better.
And then we've got a, a leg curl.
I don't remember whether you said it was seated or lying.
He didn't mention in his training log.
Yeah, so, you know, again, it's just one leg curl, which is not amazing because it's impossible to
get all of the hamstrings I'm.
Assuming it's seated, just based off the videos I've seen of him.
Yeah, so, so, so yeah, not, not great.
Just having the one leg curl variation there.
And then we've got the, but again, I think that one, I think just looking at this program that the
reason why we've got so few exercises in this workout compared to the other one is that barbell back
squad at the beginning.
Yeah.
I mean, it takes 20 minutes for a strong person to get to the point where they're happy with their
work weight and their movement patterns and everything is comfortable to be able to do work sets on
a barbell back spot.
You know, so you just like it chews up a third of your workout straight.
To well, especially if you've got a strong person like Dorian and you're doing sets of eight.
One of the one thing that I think is a huge problem that I'm seeing online is this idea that one
should always train in the five or, you know, 4 to 6 Rep range or five to seven or whatever.
And I understand what people are saying from a stimulus standpoint, but then they're taking that and
saying, well, every exercise should be done in that Rep range.
And then you've got people doing squats or doing standing car phrase or doing deadlift or whatever,
and it's like, well, hold up, you need every single weight plate in the gym to be able to achieve
that.
And it's going to take you half an hour to set up an exercise.
It's just not feasible a lot of the time.
Yeah, absolutely.
I mean, I'm, I think really we've got to be pragmatic and look at the exercise and go, you know, how
long does it take to warm up or get comfortable or steal all the plates in the gym or whatever it is
that you need to do to make the mission happen?
You know, I, I just contrast how long it used to take me to warm up to do my Barber back squat sets.
And I contrast that now with, you know, going to a really nice leg press machine and doing single
leg leg presses.
You know, really I, I, there's a fantastic leg press machine, 45° leg press machine in the gym that
I'm in at the moment.
And it's huge.
I feel like I disappear inside it.
I mean, it's like a car.
I feel like I'm sitting in this gigantic like piece of machinery and it's so stable and so
comfortable and so well designed that, you know, I can do single leg work in that.
And it's a really heavy piece of kit, so you only need a small amount of weight and you're already
working pretty hard with single leg stuff.
So honestly, I just go there and I just take a couple of, you know, kind of plates from wherever I
can find them.
And straight away I'm within two minutes, I'm doing my work set.
And that's just amazing, you know, for somebody who's obviously not interested in, you know, driving
their squat up anymore, like I was 15 years ago.
And, you know, now I can just get my sort of quad work done very, very quickly and it's very, very
convenient.
So I would look at that and be like, yeah, hack squat or leg press straight away would be what I
would do.
And then the knee extension, leg curl, I think you could do two different leg curls at this point.
You could do both lying unseated because you haven't had the 20 minute kind of warm up for your back
squat and then standing calf raised.
Fantastic.
And that's it for the lower body and that's pretty solid.
You know, I don't.
I don't, I don't.
I think that the barbell squat is doing a lot of harm in this workout by chewing up resources that
it's not really giving much back for.
Yeah, Especially with the deadlift on the other day, like arguably if there's any sort of minor
benefit you're getting, not from a quad perspective, but just from a general perspective, you're
going to be getting that with a deadlift as well.
So I don't I don't see the value in this heavy compound when you've got something like a hip hinge
elsewhere.
So in terms of the arm work, he's got a standing barbell.
Biceps Co and then he's followed that up with A1 arm preach curl.
So again, echoes of that idea of doing, you know, kind of more muscle mass exercises 1st and smaller
amounts second.
Honestly, a barbell standing barbell curl with a preach curl, they're not massively different.
They are different depending on the incline of the preach curl.
If it's a very horizontal incline, OK, a little bit more biceps targeted, a little bit less
brachyradialis.
But honestly, there are better combinations I think.
Yeah, I don't know if he stayed training in the same gym, but again, if I recall the videos I've
seen him training the biceps curl he's using, he's usually a horizontal type machine.
So it might be significantly different enough here.
You know, I think at least if you're going to do a preacher curl as as one of the exercises, then
the other exercise I would kind of want to really push towards the Brachioradialis.
So I want to try and find something that has, you know, a cable curl maybe that has more kind of
peak, peak effort close to the top of the range of motion.
And then in terms of the two triceps exercises, you know, OK, I mean, if you're doing triceps
extensions, oh, sorry, triceps pushdowns in a standing position, you kind of that's, that's most of
the triceps trained pretty effectively.
Lying triceps extension is probably not really doing anything any different unless he's doing that
single arm.
I don't know whether he's doing that single arm or not, so.
Yeah.
So really for me, I don't, I'm not, there's nothing wrong with, well, nothing wrong, but there's,
you can see the you can see that there is variety of those arm exercises and there's the, they're
definitely moving in the direction of being good coverage, but they're not my preferred exercises
for achieving the same goal.
How different my preferred exercises would be from that in terms of results, I think would be
relatively small.
I mean, you're talking about 1020% difference, but you know, it's not not like gigantic differences.
It's it's OK, is what I'm saying.
Another thing I like about this format, we've obviously talked about this, the third exercise is
doing these muscle groupings or second or third exercise and, and doing, you know, usually a single
join or whatever the exercise might be.
He's also doing that for a single set.
So most of the exercises are done for two sets, but that last exercise is a single set.
So he's he's actually trying two different sort of tools at that exercise to increase or maintain
moding and recruitment.
The given that this is 1985, the level of instinctual or yeah, instinctual understanding of how
different exercises are doing different things and what's happening is extraordinary.
You know what I mean?
But you have to bear in mind that when this workout was designed, but nobody knew anything about the
Physiology that we're talking about today.
So the fact that you've got multiple exercises that are doing different things, the fact that you've
got a single joint, sort of even single arm or single limb exercise going, you know, last to
maximize recruitment that you know, is an extraordinary kind of instinctual understanding of what's
happening.
It's very, very fascinating to look at.
Yeah.
And again, this idea of having two or three exercises per muscle group, you know, obviously that's
very similar to the Steve Reeves plan we looked at where Steve just had it all on one day and he's
just done a single set of everything.
And then Dorian's given us an example here of splitting it over 2 workouts and adding that second
set.
And obviously the the Mic Mensa plan we looked at again is a relatively similar format as well, two
or three exercises per muscle group, usually 2 sets.
So it gives one an, an example, an understanding of how this same idea of trying to train a muscle
group with those two to three exercises.
And you can choose whether you have them on one workout and do an AAA or you can split it over two
different workouts and do some kind of AB variation.
But it shows you exactly how that can look in practice.
Yeah, No, this has been a really fascinating discussion because this is very different from what
we've seen before.
There's aspect to it that I'm not a huge fan of.
The frequency, I think is a little bit on the low side.
But in terms of excise selection, construction of the actual combination of exercises, it's very,
very advanced in terms of the instinctual understanding of how these different exercises are
working.
Amazing stuff.
The frequency while you mentioned is on the low side even for some of those exercises done with a
single set, he's still training them roughly what every, what would this be every four or five days.
So it's kind of scraping in there as on the very lowest end of what we would want to see.
Well, The thing is with the exercises that he is using single sets.
Those are the, the, the kind of the, the, the function in the workout is not.
Yeah, what he's, what he's doing literally is analogous to what we were talking about last week in
terms of physiological drop sets, because he's literally just picking exercise which is almost
identical to the one that he's already done.
And then he's just applying a smaller muscle mass, you know, in that context, allowing himself to
keep the recruitment high for the final set.
So he's doing a better job than he would be if he would literally just keeping a same exercise and
doing an extra set.
That's the important thing.
So he's getting a better stimulus than say he's doing, say, 2 sets of bench press plus a set of
flies, and someone else is doing three sets of bench press.
He's getting a better stimulus for the same PEC mussifiers than the person doing three sets of bench
press.
Yeah.
Yeah, that's an interesting way of looking at that, that that last exercise is not there to
necessarily provide new stimulus to new fibres that hasn't been.
Used earlier.
No, it is.
Maintaining a high level of stimulus.
Which person doing multiple sets of the same bilateral high muscle mass exercise is not getting
because they're dropping off too much?
So let's transition now into the topic you want to discuss with us, which is very related to what
we've just been talking about with Dorian's plan.
Do you want to introduce us?
Yeah.
So basically what I'd like to talk about is this idea that or this comparison if you like, between
doing a program in which the selection for each muscle group is more limited.
So for example, somebody is going to the gym and they just do close grip pull downs or close grip
rows for the back.
And that's their only back exercise for the day.
And they do a bunch of sets for that.
And then they go back to the gym two or three days later and maybe they do, you know, well, I get
pull downs and then they go to the gym two or three days later and they maybe do, I don't know,
pullovers or something.
So they're kind of doing different exercises every time they go to the gym.
They're doing multiple sets each time they go.
And that's a very classic.
Classic.
It's a very modern classic, if you like.
It's sort of 80s, nineties, 2000s way of training.
Yeah.
Not classic in our sense, but classic in the in the kind of modern sense.
Now recently we've kind of tried to sort of push a revival of the sort of silver era way of
approaching the same problem, which is instead of doing, you know, say three sets of each of those
exercises, ABC format is to basically just do one set of each exercise in every single workout.
So full body A if you like.
So it would be again, narrow group row, white group pull down and then a pullover or whatever, you
know, sort of in each workout.
And essentially what we've seen in the last sort of two or three weeks is people are starting to try
to make the case that the ABC format of doing say two or three sets of of single exercises is better
than doing this kind of multiple exercise approach for every workout.
And I just want to walk people through exactly what is happening physiologically and show why it's
impossible to make that case, because it is literally impossible to make that case.
So if we start by saying what is happening with the multiple exercise protocol, so we go to the gym
and we do three different exercises for a particular muscle group.
And what's happening is that obviously there is going to be a different a set of muscle fibers at
the top end of the motenic pool that are being activated by each of those three exercises.
And that's happening because of the voluntary activation deficit that exists and the neuro
mechanical matching principle which preferentially uses muscle fibers which have better leverage
earlier as we progress through Heneman's size principle sequence.
So essentially what's happening is that in the case of the narrogate row, there are fibers that are
better suited to wide grid pull downs that simply just don't get activated because of this voluntary
activation deficit.
In the case the wide grid pull down, there are fibres that are better suited towards surgical plane
pulling that don't get activated.
So ultimately it's just you leave out whatever is least useful in terms of muscle fibre activation.
And what that means is that when we do a multiple exercise protocol in each workout, we go to the
gym, we do actually activate each of those sets of fibres.
And there's a lot of overlap lowered down the motor unit pool.
But at the very top, there's a different set of fibers that are being activated and therefore
loaded.
Now what you're therefore going to get is across those three, say for example, you're doing single
sets, you do a single set of each exercise.
You're going to get essentially A3 set stimulus for the bottom 80 or 90% of the muscle and you're
getting one set stimulus for each of the top segments of the motor unit pool in each case.
Is that making sense?
Yes.
Cool.
So basically that's going to happen every single time we go to the gym.
And because we're doing, say, 3 workouts a week or even every other day, if we want to push the kind
of bounds of, of possibility here, then ultimately, what we're going to see is a very rapid growth
of our overlapped areas, the bottom sort of 8090% and slower, but still very meaningful growth
because three single sets a week is still pretty meaningful growth.
You get meaningful growth of two single sets a week on separate days.
Of course, then of course, we are going to see growth in both regions.
We're just going to see more rapid growth at the bottom end of the kind of motive pool than at the
top.
OK, fine.
Now let's look at what happens if I do AABC protocol where I'm doing, say literally three different
exercises across the week and only one exercise per worker.
So I go to the gym and I do three sets of narrow grid rows.
And then I go to the gym on say, Wednesday and I do three sets of whatever it might be by grid pull
downs.
And then my third exercise of the week, you know, pullovers or whatever.
And what's happening there is that again, my 80%, my 80% across the week.
So thinking about the fibres that are shared across those three exercises, my 80% across the week is
going to behave exactly the same way as my 80% across the week is in the previous program that I
described with multiple exercises on every single workout.
There's no difference.
They're literally identical workouts in that respect.
What's different is the top 1020% of the muscle in that scenario, my top 20% of the muscle is going
to get three sets on Monday and then it's not going to get trained again until the following Monday.
That's maintenance.
That's maintenance volume.
I mean we literally got 3 or 4 studies showing that that is a maintenance volume.
There is no scenario in which you can argue anything other than going to stay exactly where it is.
It's not going to get any bigger.
It's not going to get.
It's more like it's just not going to do anything.
And that's the problem that you get with doing an ABC type format.
You are literally going to have atrophy happening across the week that negates the hard work you've
done at the top end of the motor unit pool.
There's a study where they looked at that.
It's sort of they had people do flat Ben, what was the flat bench and incline bench?
They did either 2 sets of each once a week or they did F the two to three sets once a week of each
or four to six sets of 1 or the other.
I believe that's what it was.
And the combination group where they did two or three sets of each, they performed the worst.
And I think that's a fairly nice depiction of kind of what you're explaining here, that if you're
just doing, you know, two or three sets once a week of that particular exercise, you're not getting
the benefit of doing different exercises because you're just losing that unique whatever the
activation is of that exercise.
Correct.
You need to have a high frequency if you're going to do small volumes of individual exercises,
multiple individual exercises in every workout.
Otherwise it's not going to work.
I mean, that's, that's kind of the combination that, that is the, the winning combination really.
But what I'm trying to explain here, the, the way I'm trying to explain this is to show people that
you have to, you have to look at 2 separate concepts.
When you're thinking about the effect of an exercise, you have to look at the overlap that that
exercise has with other muscle, other exercises for the same muscle.
And then you have to look at the non overlap because that's what we're really saying.
So and The thing is, when critics argue against this idea, they actually accept the principle
because they will say, ah, well, if you do multiple exercises, you know, for the same muscle group,
then you don't maximize the stimulus for the fibres that are used in that first exercise.
And absolutely, that's totally true, but that's the point because you're not training those other
fibres that you're neglecting in that workout.
So you're just going to put yourself onto maintenance volume for those fibres.
I mean that that's the point that the, the critiques of this particular concept or this training
method actually accept the fact that different exercises train different muscle fibres.
I mean, just to be clear, let me just kind of go drop down a level and, and spell this out.
So the way that the brain controls the muscle.
Is to allocate the Moss fires into motor units.
So essentially when we talk about motor unit recruitment, what we're saying, it's not just a magical
spell that we cast on the Internet and say, oh, motor unit recruitment, because that's what I hear
people using terminology like as if it's kind of or if I say the words motor unit recruitment, then
it sounds like I know what I'm talking about.
It sounds like you know, I'm, I'm saying something meaningful.
Motor unit recruitment literally just means that you're switching motor units on and motor units are
essentially groups of mosss fires connected to a motor neuron.
So when you say that you're recruiting a motor unit, you're saying that you're switching groups of
muscle virus on.
That's literally, you know, the kind of the, the thing that we're talking about.
So we recruit a motor unit and we switch that group of muscle virus on.
If the shortening velocity of the muscle at the point when you switch those muscle virus on is slow,
then those muscle virus experience high enough mechanical tension to experience a hypertrophy
stimulus.
That's it.
That mean that is literally how the hypertrophy model works.
Now you can argue finessing around a few small areas, but ultimately those are largely relevant in
comparison with either recruitment or and or the force for loss determines the fiber mechanical
tension.
So if you're saying, and the critics have said this, if you're saying that the use of a single
exercise for multiple sets in a workout applies a, you know, high dosage of mechanical tension
stimulus to, you know, all of these fibers.
But if you change exercises and do three separate exercises for the same muscle group, then you
don't get the same dosage of mechanical tension stimulus applied to the same fibers.
The only way that can happen is by different motion.
It's getting recruited and different fibers getting activated.
You can't do it by any other method.
You can't change the force velocity relationship.
You can't change the amount of tension the fibers are experiencing.
They're either on or off.
Now people get really, really bogged down in trying to argue that motor unit firing rates or rate
coding can change the amount of mechanical tension that muscle fires are experiencing.
They don't or it doesn't for reasons that most people don't understand, which is that the level of
rate coding necessary to cause tetanus in a muscle fiber changes according to the oxidative
potential of that fiber.
So if you look at very slow muscle fires fibers so people will go, oh, well, you know, you know, you
activate muscle fibers at the bottom end of the Moat unit pool doing daily life.
But Oh no, the rate coding's not high enough for them to experience mechanical tension.
We need, you know, kind of Max effort in order for those fibres at the bottom end of the motor unit
pool to achieve high levels of mechanical tension.
So some people will go because I will often argue that walking across the room maximizes the
mechanical tension of the low threshold motor unit muscle fibres.
So you're getting a hypertrophy stimulus on those fibres in day-to-day life.
And you don't need to have rate coding up in the kind of 30s in order to make that happen.
And people will go, Oh no, no, no, you can't.
You can't do that.
Those fibres aren't experiencing maximum mechanical tension because rate coding is not high enough
because your motor unit recruitment level is not high enough.
And like you're not looking at the rate coding necessary to recruit to achieve tetanus in the
average fibre.
You want to know what the rate coding is necessary to achieve tetanus in a slow trench, highly
oxidative muscle fibre at the bottom end of the motor unit pool.
What's that number?
And they look at you as if say, well, they're all the same, aren't they?
I'm like, no, they're not.
You can get tetanus in a slow trench muscle fibre at the very bottom end of the motor unit pool at 5
to 8 Hertz, which is nothing.
You know you're you're going to be at like 12 to 15 before you even know it.
So really when we're talking about how recoding effects mechanical tension, it's almost negligible
in the range of speeds that we're talking about in strength training.
It's almost negatable because ultimately as soon as you kind of get to a certain level of
recruitment, most of the fibers kind of a little bit back from that in the motor unit pool, in
Henman size printable sequence, they're already maxed out because they don't need high levels of
rate coding to Max out.
But when you're talking about, oh, we need like, you know, sort of 50 Hertz to Max out the
mechanical tension of high threshold motor units.
Well, yeah, you do, but you don't need that any anything like that for everything lowered out.
It's it's, it's a completely different universe.
And that's why rate coding doesn't really work as hard as people think it does to affect mechanical
tension in the context of strength training, the velocities we're interested in.
If you want to talk about high velocity movements in sporting situations, yeah, rate coding is
massively important.
But for what we're talking about in context of bodybuilding, it's pretty much irrelevant.
So again, the only thing you can really do in the context of strength training to affect how much
stimulus the Moss fibers of a particular region experience is either switch them on or off.
That's it.
There's, there's nothing else around the edges that you can really do.
As I say, it's finessing really, rather than actually, it's just making Physiology a bit messier
than it than it is.
But oh, sorry, a bit messier than I'm presenting it as ultimately, you know, the model I'm
presenting here is, is very close to being pretty much exactly what's going on.
And as a result, you, you can't really say that fibres are somehow being not trained fully, but they
are not also atrophying afterwards because you haven't trained.
So it's like you, you can't say that you're getting more stimulus for some fibres, but equally
they're not atrophying.
They're, they're, it's binary.
It's like you're either switching them on and, and training them or you're not.
It's pick one and that's what I'm seeing the critics at the moment trying to do.
They're trying to have their cake and eat it.
They're trying to go, Oh well, you know, with multiple sets of a single exercise, I'm getting full
stimulus on all all the fibres that this exercise trains, but I'm also training all the other
fibres, all the other exercises train.
I'm just not training them as effectively.
No, that's impossible, Absolutely impossible.
You can't do that.
That is physiologically impossible.
It's like the fibres are either being trained or they're not.
Pick one, because ultimately if a critic is going OK, so this one exercise actually trains or at
least somehow activates and loads, but not very, you know, as effectively as another exercise.
If an exercise is training all the muscle fibers in the muscle, which is what the critics I think
are trying to argue, then you'd actually only need one exercise for every single muscle.
Room.
Yeah, exactly.
Yeah.
You don't need to change the exercise in the next workout.
Just pick, you know, one exercise for every muscle group.
Nobody believes that that would ever work.
So if you think that multiple exercises are actually necessary for a single muscle group because
they're not actually doing the same things as each other, which I think most people fundamentally
accept, then do them in every single workout.
Otherwise, you're just atrophying the fibre and you're ending up in maintenance volume for, you
know, some of the fibers at the top end of the motive pool.
I genuinely don't understand why people are are fighting this particular point.
It really is very shocking to me.
No, it's, you know, I'm struggling because I'm trying to think of ways to play devil's advocate here
and at least try to do the counter argument justice.
And there's just no logic to it.
Like I'm actually really struggling to think of any way to present it in a, in a way that makes any
sense at all.
Because there's so many holes that every single turn is like, well, that doesn't make sense and that
doesn't make sense and that doesn't make sense.
So the it's just I I don't know a way to present it.
Exactly.
And I'm, I'm suffering the same thing because I'm trying to find different ways of explaining it in
a hope that people who have been persuaded by, you know, the, the, the critics of this, this idea,
you know, might understand better.
And I'm kind of tying myself in knots trying to find different ways of explaining.
But ultimately that, that's basically where we're at, you know, and I, I read very carefully what
these critics say and I try to find the logic in the, in the sequence.
And we've sent, you know, kind of screenshots backwards and forwards, but slowly going through.
And some, some of the critics are actually very useful, useful, very helpful in the sense that they
number the paragraphs of the, of the, kind of the, the sequence of their logical arguments.
So we kind of go, well, one follows, sorry, 2 follows 1, but then three doesn't follow 2.
And we kind of go backwards and forwards going, you know, that's where the, that's where the
argument breaks down.
You kind of see that there's like this kind of chain of argument that we're following and going Yep,
Yep, Yep, Yep, Yep, yeah, OK, that's where it breaks down.
And then you're like, OK, so why is that happening?
Why did they think that's the case?
And, you know, that doesn't seem to be the information available to help us, you know, bridge that
gap at the moment.
But you know, anyway, so, so that was yeah, that was the that was the thing that I wanted to spend
time discussing.
One thing I wanted to throw back to you and sort of just very quickly cover is this idea that if we
are going to do multiple exercises for a single muscle group in a workout, what can we do to make
that process easier?
Because some people from a practical perspective have said, OK, I can understand the Physiology.
I understand that this is a good way of training compared to just going in and doing two or three
sets of single exercises.
But I find switching between exercises takes me a lot of time.
I find that I end up spending more time in the gym.
I don't want to do that.
So how can I make that process smoother?
What can I do to, you know, kind of speed up that that switching of exercises?
And I thought we could perhaps just brainstorm a few ideas and get that open that idea to, you know,
kind of more people.
Yeah, I think we introduced it well with the Dorian plan when we were talking about the overhead
pressing and we're saying, well you could do behind the neck and and a convenient six second option
here would be a top partial behind the neck style.
Totally.
Yeah, totally.
Because what we've done there is ultimately we've made a small compromise.
Because you even said you're like, oh, you know, like I would like this sagittal plain press.
Yeah.
And it's like, yes, if we were trying to optimize it and, and maximize everything, we could OK, this
is potentially a better option.
But if we're saying, well, how can we just shift it towards biasing something a little bit different
without adding a whole lot of setup time, then that would be a great option.
You know another and you know this is something often when I train with people in person and you
know they have done.
I was just.
Going to say this exact same example I've been mentioning for years, which is going from a chest
supported row to a Kelso shrug.
Yes, exactly the same idea.
You literally, you're already sat in the piece of equipment that's going to serve as your, you know,
precisely next exercise and you just adjust the weight to whatever you need to do and you move on to
the next exercise.
It's so convenient when you set them up in that order.
Yeah.
Well, I would say it's a continuum, right.
So at one end of the continuum, we've got, well, you've, you can change like the equipment, you can
like the entire setup changes.
And then in the middle of that continuum, we've got, well, you stay in the same station, but maybe
you set up or the, or the weight changes, there's some minor adjustment you need to make.
And then at the end we've got, well, you stay in the same station.
You don't even need to change your setup.
You just change execution.
And that's the one that's gonna have the smallest difference in, in sort of biasing different muscle
regions, but it's one that's gonna be the most convenient.
So, and there's, sometimes we actually work very well.
But you know, one example would be like a pull up or a chin up.
So you can effectively use the same load.
You do the, the stronger version first, you do a chin up, so a central plane chin up.
And then you do a frontal plane pull up and use the same.
Well, actually in that instance, I'd probably do the weaker one first.
But you can use the same load.
You're just going to change repetitions you get slightly and that's it.
It's not taking any additional time that if you're doing 2 sets of chin up and the example you gave
for the chest supported row, that's easy.
You could even do if you wanted to do a wide grip row and then you wanted to do a Saturnal plan or
you could do that as well.
So it's realistically you could look at just about every single muscle group and you could find a
station where you can do 2 exercises.
Like cables are amazing.
Like if you're doing curls you can do it a reverse grip top partial curl, you can do it behind the
back curl.
It's very easy to do arm work just using a cable and making it more bracky radialis or more bices
bracky.
So my encouragement to people when they're coming up with this idea that, hey, I don't know if I can
spend that long in the gym is don't think about setting up a whole new exercise, a whole new
station.
Think about the exercises you're doing and how can you use that same station and just make a small,
small adjustment to it.
You know, maybe you're doing a flat bench.
OK, let's do do one set very wide grip and then one set close grip.
You don't need to change anything else.
I was just thinking about how again, this is like when we talked about Dorian's plan, a lot of the
really interesting stuff was in the upper body also really section there when it came to the lower
body.
And OK, the arms were similarly interesting, but we probably would have just selected different
exercises.
But for the lower body it was very kind of minimal in comparison in terms of exercise variability.
And I think the often the the the same issue exists here, which is that for upper body stuff, you
can kind of do these sequences where you can go straight from one exercise to another and
essentially be in the same station and ultimately just train a slightly different region of muscle.
Lower body is more difficult.
I'm struggling to think of examples where this can be done, but the.
Simplest is calf for gastrocity so you can do toes in toes out, neutral.
Toes, but you can also do that in your leg press.
Exactly.
So you would see what's that by doing leg press.
By sitting in the leg press and then I do my calf razors straight after my leg press is finished so
I can actually do multiple things there.
Harder with hamstrings work because you do kind of need the two different like variations, but
again, you know, that's that's probably one of those things and adductors, abductors, glutes, that
kind of stuff again is start to get a bit kind of tricky.
Yeah, it does a little bit.
I mean, obviously most abductor abductor machines will do both.
So at least if we pop them together, it's not like you're kind of getting 2 exercises in in one.
In a sense, you're not having to go find a new machine your.
Your your Western civilization privilege is showing there.
I definitely don't experience that in the part.
Of the your machines are not combo machines.
OK, there you go I had a client this week an Aussie client who's got a PEC deck that does not turn
into reverse PEC deck and I was just like what is going on?
I didn't even know they existed.
Where you can't do.
The same, same, same, same, same for same for me.
I've not seen one of those double double exercises in a very long time.
Not since.
Not since I went traveling.
I guess other ways to make it work for lower body, it could be as simple as say you're doing a glute
bridge or hip thrust.
Yeah, like if you're going to do multiple sets, well, arguably you could do one set with a normal
foot position and one set with your toes further pointed out feet wider apart, right.
So yes, is it going to be the the best exercise choice for biasing different regions of the glutes?
Maybe not, but is it going to start to shift it in that direction?
Obviously will a little bit so I do think you're a little bit more limited with lower body, but I do
think there's still some easy enough options, especially if you're gonna be doing multi sets, like
if you're gonna do multiple sets of a stiff leg deadlift or, you know, stiff leg crack pull.
OK, you could do one set stiff leg.
You can do one set slight Benazir mania deadlift and and get something slightly different out of
that.
Like there's easy enough tweaks you can make to.
It won't be perfect, but you should push it a little bit in One Direction.
Yeah, absolutely.
I think those are the kind of compromises that you can kind of look at if you're really, really
struggling to, you know, go the full distance if you like and and do fundamentally different
exercises in these cases.
Another thing that I've I think is causing problems for people is that they think they need to do a
billion warm up sets before every single exercise.
This, I think I just want to kind of make a, an observation here, which is that one of my major
criticisms of strength and conditioning and the fitness industry in general is that people
complicate things that are not actually complicated and then they ignore complexity that actually
exists.
That's because they don't do the reading to see where the complexity really exists.
And so they have hugely complicated, for example, periodised routines, massively complicated
training splits.
And actually it's doing, you know, less effective kind of, you know, producing less effective
results than a simpler program that maybe recognize as the underlying physiological complexities
that do exist.
And I think one of those things that people get really wrapped up in, because it's one of those
things that training condition coaches and bodybuilding influencers can see happening, is this idea
of doing particular sort of combinations of warm up repetitions As so like you can even see this in
some of the textbooks about, oh, you need to do, you know, 10 reps of this load and then go up to do
8 reps of this.
I'm like, honestly, it's doing 0, absolutely 0.
The actual warm up in terms of muscle temperature is happening in a cardiovascular kind of section
of the workout earlier when you're doing multiple repetitions for a, for an exercise that's doing
zip when it comes to actually warming the muscle.
And so really you're just feeling the weight and then eventually getting comfortable with it and
then eventually creating a post activation potentiation effect just before you do your main set.
That's it.
So I'm literally going to the gym and I'm sitting down in the apparatus that I'm going to use and
I'll do a Rep with a lightweight to make sure that none of my limbs have fallen off in my sleep.
And then I'll do another weight, another kind of heavier weight to start to feel like it's, you
know, actually pushing.
And then I'll do one post activation repetition, post activation potentiation repetition just before
I do my main set.
And that's it.
That's that's what I'm doing, you know, and you know, people say, Oh no, you're going to get injured
doing that.
I'm like, OK, check back in five years because I've been doing this for about 15 years now.
So it's slightly different.
But you know, I think that's something else that people can look at is the number of warm up
repetitions that they're doing.
Do they really need to be doing a ton of warm up reps before every single exercise?
Probably not.
Well, especially if if someone's going towards what we've just mentioned there, where they're doing
effectively almost the same exercise as making this slight adjustment.
You're doing a top partial instead of a full drum or the head press or whatever it is, or you're
doing a Kelso after after chest supported row.
Like no one's going to argue.
Surely maybe some people will, but I don't think many people are going to argue.
You need to do your warm up sets for your Kelso after doing a neutral grip chest supported row.
Like that just doesn't really follow the logic test, right.
So at that point, it's like, well, if you're doing whatever your warm up set or warm up routine is
for the multi set row you were going to do, you're not adding anything new if you're just turning
one of those chest supported rows into a Kelso.
Same with the overhead press.
So even if someone wants to stick with their, however many sets of warm up sets that they're
choosing to do, if you're doing kind of that variation we've just discussed, it doesn't change
anything.
I personally like, I, I was travelling a few weeks ago, I went to a new gym and I did a full body 15
to 20 exercise, a single set of everything.
I didn't do a single warm up set.
There was one or two machines where I just had to like make sure that it was adjusted correctly.
I did like 1 repetition and make sure it fit.
And then I just did my work sets and you know, I was just doing sets of I set it at a load.
I thought I'd probably get about 10 repetitions out and up, usually getting sort of 8 to 15 reps out
and nothing hurt.
I didn't get injured, everything felt fine.
And that was, you know, single set, no warm up sets.
I was done in 45 minutes.
And that was a, you know, pretty comprehensive.
Like I said, what 17 sort of exercises or whatever it was full body.
And I'm not saying everyone needs to go and do no warm up sets.
Obviously you've just described that you do do some warm up sets and certainly.
Warm up more like warm up reps rather than sets.
I mean, that's the that's the point.
I think if we kind of got people to think about warm up reps instead of warm up sets, they would
stop thinking that the set is somehow doing something because the set is doing nothing, literally
doing nothing.
So, you know, I do literally a Rep, as I say, to make sure that nothing has kind of, you know, gone
horribly wrong in my sleep.
And then I do another repetition, which feels like I'm actually pushing the weight.
And then I do a final repetition which feels like a post activation potentiation Rep.
So it's almost my way.
If you if you're doing those single reps, you don't need to be waiting between them.
Yeah, like people think, oh, you're going to wait a minute, 2 minutes between your warm up sets like
for what purpose?
If you're doing one or two warm up graphs, OK, go heavier.
That feels good.
Go heavier.
That felt good.
Do your post It's.
Probably just 15 seconds, 15 seconds I would say.
Exactly if I was going to.
Process the information to process the information and make sure I'm happy and and that's yeah, I'm,
I'm in there.
It's.
Just the light and go.
Yeah, there's no, there's no kind of this is what machines really, in addition to allowing us to
train muscle groups, that is much more difficult to train in three ways.
This is really the massive advantage of machines because as I say, when I was actually doing a lot
to bobble by squatting, say 1520 years ago, this is not something that I would say is possible.
You can't do that with with a free weight complicated exercise.
It take It took me 20 minutes to go from empty bar all the way up to my work way.
And it just is a massive investment of time and energy.
If you want to get good at that, that's what you have to do.
Fine.
That's the rule.
And the same thing really to a lesser extent with weighted pull ups.
I would work my way up in weight and I'd be making sure that nothing hurt and I'd get all the way up
to my, there's no way on earth I could jump straight in and start doing, you know, kind of super
heavy weighted pull ups or dips or something like that.
It's just not going to happen.
I would say probably 10 to 15 minutes of warm up for those 20 minutes plus for, for warming up for
squats and deadlifts and things that what we're talking about is completely different from that, you
know, totally and utterly different.
And if there is an exercise in your plan that you're doing at the moment that takes you 20 minutes
to warm up for, then seriously consider swapping it out for something that doesn't.
Yeah.
What's the purpose of using that exercise?
Unless, of course, you are training to get better at that exercise, fine.
I mean, that's a separate goal.
But we're not talking about that.
We're talking about bodybuilding.
Yes, yes exactly.
And that brings us back to what the point I made in the during plan we are saying so many people I'm
seeing online are saying don't ever do more than 5 or 6 repetitions.
And again I understand physiologically why people are making that statement.
But in the context of what we're talking about here, if we're using any multi joint exercise and
we're saying do your 4 to 5 repetitions, you're going to feel best doing a couple warm up sets.
You just will.
And is that worth it?
Is it worth those two warm up sets that you need to do your set of five compared to one warm up
repetition or two warm up repetitions you might need to do your set of 10.
I think in the context of this more sort of maximalist type retain we're talking about where you
might have 8:10, 12/15/20 different exercises.
I just don't think it's feasible to do those sets of five and and double or triple your warm up
time.
Yeah.
I mean, I think it varies between exercises.
I think it varies between people.
I think for me I can get away with sixes and sevens without really changing the amount of warm up
reps I do.
I think 6 for me is definitely the cut off.
Like that's where I see it really change when I go below 6.
6:00 and 7:00 is fine for me that that isn't a problem at all.
I think for lower body, I mean, I really struggle to go heavier than 8 on calf razors, for example.
It just doesn't really click for me.
I find that's really difficult.
I my toes start really hurting when I do when I do super heavy calf razors.
But then yeah, anyway, so, so yeah, I think there's going to be a bit of exercise selection issues
there.
But you know, I mean, I think it is important to recognise that everything that you're doing in the
workout for a given muscle group is going to contribute to post workout fatigue.
So if you are trying to do say fours or fives because you're trying to limit post workout fatigue,
fantastic.
I mean that that's totally true.
But if you're then adding on a whole bunch of extra repetitions that you're doing in the warm up to
get to the point where you're comfortable with that four or five work set that are you going to end
up in more or less the same place that you would do just did a 6-7 or an 8 without those extra warm
up repetitions?
I don't know.
Obviously this is going to be something that people are going to have to figure out for.
Themselves.
Yeah, yeah.
But.
Again, the time issue is the point that you're making, which is that, you know, if we're just
interested in time because we want to get through an extra couple of exercises and push towards what
might be considered a more maximalist type of routine, then, you know, ultimately we are looking to
reduce that time.
And a six or a 7-8, maybe even a 10, is going to be a better choice.
Yeah, I mean, my biggest thing with that is give it a go.
You know, or I hear so many people saying you can't do it, you can't do 20 exercises, it's too much.
I would never be able to get it done.
It's like, well hang on, follow an intelligently desired Maximus plan and just see how you feel.
Because it's the feedback I hear from people is generally that that's their preferred way of
training once they give it a go.
I think a gateway way for people to get into if they're really skeptical is to start with a full
body AB and do say 10 or 11 exercises in each of those workouts.
That is essentially the maximalist program of say 20 or so exercises split in half and they start
with that.
And once they get to the point where that workout is taking them 20 minutes and then maybe consider
having a go at, you know, combining it and seeing how that feels.
I mean, I think that will be a really cool way to start.
If somebody is really, really sceptical or really nervous about trying to do that or it just,
they've tried it once and they just felt it took them, you know, 10 years to complete, then OK,
fine.
Go back to a full body AB and do the smaller versions and see whether you can get that time down to
say 20 or so minutes and then 25 minutes and then you know, combine them.
See if see if that works for you.
I think that would be the way to approach it from a practical perspective.
If if trying to do 20 or so exercises and single workout just kind of blows your mind initially.
And honestly, some people may just do the AB and stay, stay there.
I mean, that's kind of where I tend to to live.
I mean, I tend to just be in that zone where I'm doing 810 exercises and then I do a different 8 to
10 exercises or mostly a different 8 to 10 exercises the following session.
Then I go back to the original workout, do AB all the time, and I love training like that because
it's so much, you know, kind of easier and it really occupies very little time and a lot of the
things I want to do so.
And you know, if you do give that a go, obviously when people tend to do AB splits like that, they
tend to add additional sets.
Yeah.
So what we're saying in that situation is look, if you if you want to stick with AB and you want to
add multi sets, by all means you can do that.
But in using that as a testing method of what you've mentioned, stick with single sets.
And then once you've done, you know, those eight to 10 exercises, single sets and like you said,
you're getting them done in 25 minutes and you're feeling good, then that's where you can test it
with single sets for that full workout retain.
Totally, totally.
I mean, yeah, I mean, there's a number of ways of, of, of, of slicing and dicing it really.
I mean, some people may say, well, actually I really like the the AB split because it means I'm not
using the same movement pattern every time.
It means that my joints are a little bit happier.
Cool.
You could if you wanted to push up to two sets on each occasion.
It's.
Got a very busy gym and it's just not feasible to use too.
Much equipment, absolutely.
I mean there's all kinds of practical but so there's a number of ways of slicing and dicing it, but
ultimately full body AB is the maximum kind of length that you can go without doing an exercise.
You can't do full body ABC that's not going to happen doesn't work.
Body AB works because you're always getting muscles, muscle regions trained inside their kind of
zone of, you know, kind of.
Minimum frequency required.
Yeah, exactly.
Exactly.
Yeah.
Cool.
Awesome.
I think that was everything we wanted to say on the excise selection stuff, I had one more thing I
wanted to mention.
Can we move on to that now?
Yeah, absolutely.
Awesome.
So basically there is this is still an exercise selection concept.
So it's all part of the same kind of discussion, it's just a separate aspect of it.
Recently, well not recently, but in the last kind of maybe 6 to 9 months, there's been a lot of
people arguing against the idea of neuro mechanical matching as a explanatory model for how the
brain chooses which muscles and muscle regions or even muscle fibres to use in an exercise.
What I want to do is just answer a couple of the popular criticisms and explain why they have to be
wrong, they can't possibly be right.
So firstly, very quickly before I move on to the main one, I just want to notice that or observe
that when people say that there is no research into neuro mechanical matching in humans, that is an
incorrect statement.
There are 9 direct studies assessing neuro mechanical matching in humans and they have all shown
that neuro mechanical matching happens.
So you will find that some fitness influencers say that there aren't any studies.
I've literally done a table.
You can see the table in multiple places on my social media showing those references.
Of those nine studies that have deliberately assessed neuro mechanical matching happening in humans
before that there are a whole bunch of studies in animals and then that obviously LED into the human
research later on.
So it's not true to say that there aren't any studies of neuro mechanical humans.
There are.
There are at least nine to my knowledge.
Conversely, there are 0 studies to my knowledge that have assessed any other idea.
So when somebody says Oh well, I think that it's multiple factors that determine which muscle fibers
are being used by the brain.
OK, show me which study you're relying on to make that statement.
There aren't any.
You can't.
You can't.
You're literally just waving your hands in the air and going, well, I think it's multifactorial.
OK, well show me the study that shows it's multifactorial then, because you can't.
Or they'll say, oh, I think it's the active link tension relation.
OK, well show me the study that's assessed where the brain or how the brain decides which part of
the active intense relationship most fibres should be activated upon, because you can't show me that
study because it doesn't exist.
So they're what they're doing is on the one hand they are making incorrect statements about the
availability of literature supporting neurochemical matching because they're saying there isn't any.
And there's 99 studies in humans, multiple studies in animals, plus 9 studies in neurons.
And then they're applying 0 requirement for any evidence for their own claims and saying, Oh well we
think it's this or OK, where are your references then?
And they'll show a reference that has no actual intention of assessing a motor control model in
humans.
It will literally be a study that's examined some aspect of motor unit, sorry, motor control in a
specific context in order to further advance how motor learning works.
It doesn't actually present a model.
It literally just has one kind of facet of how motor learning and motor unit control works.
And they'll say, yeah, well, we're referencing this and like, what does that show?
Does it have a model?
Does it have a scheme?
Does it show you how the brain works?
No, it doesn't.
And so they're applying totally different require sort of requirements, if you like, or evidence
thresholds for their model, which is 0 because they don't even have a model.
And on the other hand, they literally just pretend that there is no evidence supporting new incoming
magic.
It's very disingenuous and it's very, very indicative of people's levels of honesty, I guess, that
they're prepared to do that, You know?
I mean, nobody that I've seen has criticized neo McLaren matching.
I've actually gone through all nine studies and showed them why they screwed every single one.
They literally just pretend that those studies don't exist.
And I just keep posting them and just keep ignoring them.
And that's, that's really disingenuous.
I mean, that's kind of where we're at with this disagreement regarding neuro mechanical.
So that's the first thing that I want to address.
There is a ton of data.
I've literally posted it 100 times.
If you're ignoring it or your favorite influencer is ignoring it, that's on you.
That's no longer my problem or it never was my problem really as far as I'm concerned.
But you can't even pretend that's my problem at this point.
So the other thing I wanted to address is this idea that the active length tension relationship
plateau can influence where the brain sends muscle activation.
So let me just explain exactly what that idea.
Well, first of all, let me just recap what neural matching says and then let's compare and contrast
what an idea would work, how an idea might work with active length tension plateau.
So in terms of neural mechanical matching, basically what that says is that the brain selectively or
preferentially activates muscle fibers in regions that have better leverage rather than regions that
don't have better leverage.
So you can imagine basically you've got like, you know, clavicular PEC or, you know, sternal or
coastal pecs and the brain goes, OK, so if I've got a size to play movement, the clavicular PEC has
great leverage there.
The coastal and sternal pecs don't have great leverage there.
So I'm not going to use those.
I'm going to send activation to the curricular PEC region instead.
And then it will follow the size principle within that region.
So when people go, Oh, well, you don't need a, you know, you don't need an American matching concept
because you've got the size principle already.
And like what I mean, like you have to decide where to send the activation first.
So are you saying that the size principle will always send activation to the smallest muscle fiber
or the smallest Motrin in my body, regardless of where that is, You know, just to do the movement?
So like, if I want to do hip extension, but the smallest muscle fiber or Motrin is in my, you know,
kind of ocular muscles, then I'm going to start blinking every time I want to do hip extension.
That's insane.
It's like size principle cannot govern the entirety of motor control.
You have to decide where the activation is going to go first.
But you would just need my exercise when you like, that's it for a full body one.
Exercise.
Your entire body would spasm every time you're trying to do anything.
I mean, it's the like your eyeballs would be kind of like flashing, like, you know, kind of lights
in the background.
Just like the idea that size principle is enough is in is absolutely insane.
You would have to literally take your brain out and put it on the table next to you to make that
statement.
And honestly, people have made that statement.
It's like, honestly, why are people listening to you?
So you have to decide where to send it first.
So there's an activation of a region first and that has got to follow some kind of decision tree.
Your brain has got to go, where do I send the activation?
OK, well, it's going to go to this region because that region has best leverage.
That's what new mechanical matching is saying.
Within that region, you then follow the size principle more or less.
So essentially, so that's what and why is new mechanical matching saying that?
It's saying that because you maximise the torque output for the energy input, the activation input.
So you get the maximum amount of joint torque for the minimum amount of energy that you are
performing.
Actually, if you look at motor control over time and motor learning over time, that's actually what
the brain is consistently trying to do.
It's always trying to get more output for less input.
I mean, ultimately that's more or less how we learn movements, especially movements that are
performance related.
So with your Mccarry machine is trying to optimize the torque output for the energy input, the
muscle activation input.
So it's an efficiency seeking engine really.
OK, so now let's compare and contrast that with what's happening with the the idea that you've got
activation being maximized where muscle fibers are on the active link denture plateau.
That isn't going to change efficiency.
It's not going to change efficiency because the way that we increase forward roduction by working on
the lateau instead of the ascending limb or the ascending limb is actually to use more ATP by
creating to create more cross bridges.
So I'm working on the active length tension ascending limb.
Then what's going to happen is I simply create fewer cross bridges for the, you know, kind of
situation that I'm in and I use less ATP and as a result, I'm losing, I'm using less energy to
create that force output.
If I work on a plateau, I use more energy to create a higher force output.
So it's not an efficiency modifier.
It's literally just saying, well, I'm going to create more force output because I happen to be able
to use more energy.
Making sense?
Yeah, exactly.
I mean, the analogy I would do there is if you're driving somewhere from point A to point B and
you're trying to conserve fuel, OK, get your foot down and you can go faster.
It's going to get you there quicker, but you're going to use more fuel to get there.
So yes, you can either go slower, take longer to get there, use less fuel or use more fuel for that
amount of time, but you're going to get there quicker, etcetera.
So if somebody wants to make the case that the active length tension plateau is a thing that the
brain incorporates into its decision making process, they are going to have to go back to the
beginning and show that what the brain is trying to do is optimize force output irrespective of
energy input rather than energy efficiency.
And all the data we have in humans shows that that's not true.
All the data in humans we have and the animals as well shows that the brain is constantly trying to
maximize efficiency, not force output irrespective of efficiency.
So got a really uphill struggle if you want to make that case.
And again, this comes back to the criticism that I just made 5 minutes ago, which is that when
people are making cases for their own crazy ideas, they're not requiring themselves to present any
evidence of any nature or any backing or any context.
Whereas as soon as they look at something that I'm presenting, which is literally from the
literature itself, they ignore the availability of all the evidence and simply pretend that it
doesn't exist.
So the level of disingenuousness that we're seeing here is just off the charts.
It's astonishing.
And people think that in some people will literally look at the moment, and we had this conversation
before we jumped on the podcast.
People aren't making critical assessments of what they're seeing in the Internet.
They're literally just going on the basis of how loud the voices are in different directions.
So we've got a lot of very loud voices shouting against neuro mechanical matching.
None of them are actually engaging with the topic at all.
They're just presenting crazy ideas that have no basis in Physiology.
And yet people will look at that and go, oh, well, there's a large number of people shouting against
it.
Therefore there must be something there.
And they're, they're trying to learn information from that and they'll just get confused.
What you need to do is actually critically assess information.
And I know that social media is making that harder daily on a day by day basis.
But if you don't do that, you can end up getting really, really confused and believing stuff that is
just nonsense.
But OK.
I mean, that's again, not my problem.
But the final thing I wanted to mention about the active relationship is that ultimately it doesn't
fit with the concept of sarcomarogenesis during strength training.
So if you think that sarcomarogenesis happens during strength training, and just to be clear, we've
got a lot of data now in humans showing that fascicle lengths increase during strength training.
Fascicle lengths are reflective of muscle fiber length increases.
And we've also now got a couple of studies in humans showing that sarcoma genesis does in fact
happen after strength training programs.
So we have got data and obviously an absolute ton of data in animals showing the same thing.
So sarcoma genesis does happen in humans, fascicle lengths increase.
Also sarcomeres in series have been noticed to increase in a smaller number of studies.
So we've got that starting point.
Sargomerogenesis during strength training wouldn't happen if the brain was always activating the
muscle fibers on the plateau of the active tension relationship, because activating the fibre on the
descending limb is necessary to trigger sargomerogenesis.
So if the brain is always selecting regions of muscles or muscles themselves that only work on the
plateau, you aren't going to get that sargomerogenesis effect.
Conversely, if neural mechanical matching is working, then the brain just sends activation to
whichever muscle has the best leverage.
And then what happens is sarcomyogenesis will move to move the plateau to that same range of motion.
And that's exactly what we see when we look at different muscles of the body.
What we see is that for example, the gastroc has best leverage in the stretch position.
It's plateau has moved to the stretch position.
If we look at the bias, it's brachy.
It has best leverage in the stretch position, It's plateau has moved to the stretch position.
Conversely, look at the brachy radialis.
It's plateau is in the contract position.
That's exactly where it's leverage is best.
Glutes, quads, again, you know plateaus just moved to wherever the leverage is best.
This is kind of what we see across the whole body.
It's just leverages are creating the initial activation and then the plateaus are migrating mostly
to those positions.
Now of course there will be some fibres that don't get used in daily life and there won't be at
those plateaus already but or plateaus in those positions already.
But of course with strength training, we do move those plateaus to those positions and that's what
psychomerogenesis is doing.
So again, if somebody thinks that the active length tension plateau is determining where the brain
sends activation during a joint angle range of motion, they've got to tell me why they think that
Sarcamergenesis happens during strength training, because it can't do if the brain is only sending
activation to the plateau.
And that's really for me the kind of slum dunk.
It's like if if your idea about how the brain controls the body doesn't fit with a whole body of
literature, in this case Sarcamergenesis, then it's wrong, You know, I mean, that's just how how
this stuff works.
And that's ultimately why I think a lot of exercise science researchers get trapped and go down very
narrow pathways that end up leading nowhere.
It's because they don't take a step back and go, does my idea about how this works fit with
everything around it?
Because they don't actually read anything around it Because everybody's siloed.
Everybody's doing their own research into, you know, and they end up, you end up in these crazy
situations where people believe in stuff that can't possibly be true, like metabolic stress can't
possibly be true if you know anything about, you know, the way that metabolites cause fatigue or,
you know, the way that metabolites work in non sort of kind of contractile situations.
So if you trap metabolites in the muscle with like a occlusion cuff and just leave them there, does
that create hypertrophy?
Well, no.
You know the same thing with muscle damage.
People think the muscle damage causes hypertrophy and it can't possibly again because if you look at
the muscle damage literature outside of the hypertrophy context, you'll see that it it actually
occurs in the post workout period, not during the workout itself.
So I'm anticipating that I'm going to see videos in Tiktok in the coming week where people are going
to say, well, no, it is still length tension.
But what happens is those fibers that are working on the petrol, you get activated 1st and then
there might be some secondary activation of fibers that are working on the descending limb and
that's why we might get cyclogenesis.
This is the.
Same problem that we have when people say, and I've addressed this question before, when people say,
Oh well, no, the brain always takes into account the size of the muscle when determining which
movement you're going to do.
I'm like, OK, so does that mean that every time I want to reach my glass of water, my glute is going
to try and do the exercise because it's bigger?
Like, no, no, no, no, no, because you were using your arm to collect the water.
I'm like, OK, but how does my brain know?
Because you're telling me that the arm is better capable of reaching for the glass of water than my
leg.
So how does the brain know that it's my arm that got to do the work, not my leg?
OK, but you're telling me size is the thing that matters.
My glute's the biggest muscle in my body, so size is the thing that's going to matter.
So why isn't size determining this movement?
And then I own, they get all confused and I'm like, it's because my arm muscles have the best
leverage to do that thing.
So leverage is the thing that matters.
And the same thing applies with this active length tension relationships.
Like somebody says, OK, so it's the active length tension relationship that determines whether the
brain uses the muscle fibre.
And I'm like, OK, So what about muscle fibres that are on perfectly on the plateau but they're in
the wrong place?
Yeah, yeah.
I was just thinking that there still needs to be a step one.
You have, you have to start with leverage before you can.
So anybody who's making any of these arguments has to accept, and they do it without thinking.
That's the problem.
I mean, there's no thinking going on.
They're just kind of grabbing concepts and kind of waving them around.
It's like you have to have a region of the muscle that can do the thing that you want to do and that
I was giving stupid examples regarding glutes and, you know, arms and things because I'm trying to
get people to think outside of their little box of their satin.
You have to be able to use the region to do the thing you want to do, otherwise the thing will
happen.
So leverage has to come before everything else.
So all you're really saying then is leverage is coming 1st and then you're trying to take the active
length tension relationship into account after you've determined I'm like, OK, now if you've
accepted that, and hopefully everybody who has a brain brain will have accepted that.
OK, so you've accepted that leverage is necessary as your starting point.
What is your filter?
What is your mechanism for assessing which of the two things is more important as you go?
What is your principle that drives the decision?
Like if I've, if I've identified a region of the muscle that's capable of doing the thing, OK,
within that region there is going to be different sub regions, OK?
And they have different leverages and they have different length tension relationships.
We've got some really cool data and like animal models showing that different parts of a muscle have
totally different leverages and also totally different length tension relationships.
That's that data exists.
So have you got this kind of region made, made-up of sub regions you've identified that the whole
region is capable of doing, you know this movement that you want to do?
OK, let's say you've got one region that's got a perfect active length tension relationship of bad
leverage and not bad leverage.
It has leverage, but it's not perfect leverage.
You've got another reason that's really cool leverage, but not quite so good.
Active, intentional nation.
What is the brain doing to decide which of those two regions to use in priority to the other one?
What is the guiding principle that sits over the top of those two things?
Because you've already told me that you accept that leverage has to be relevant in order to decide
which region of the body is going to be used to do a movement.
I mean, anybody disagreeing with that can just leave the conversation at this point because it's
insane.
So you've accepted that leverage has?
Essentially that's the bulk of neuro mechanical matching.
And as you've pointed out multiple times, everybody who critiques neuro mechanical matching usually
ends up replacing it with neuro mechanical matching because they end up going and you've literally,
I've seen you have conversations with people on the Internet where they've gone, this person is
being really bombastic and yelling at the camera going new mechanical matching is dead or whatever.
And, and they've and then they've tried to replace it and they've gone.
The most important thing is leverage.
I'm like, OK, so you just replace new mechanical matching with new mechanical matching.
Congratulations, Gold Star.
Go to the front of the class.
You know, and, and I've seen you have conversations with these people and they're just like they are
not doing, there's no thinking going on at all.
They're literally just charismatic people yelling at the camera now when people say Oh well, we
found this study and it shows that the active length tension plateau doesn't line up with the
leverage.
And there's a famous example where there was a modelling study done and the glutes appeared to have
active length tension plateau on 45°, but the leverage is best at 0° of hip flexion.
That result was created by the assumptions that were put into the model in the first place.
That model didn't create that output because it figured out what sarcamel lengths were in the
glutes.
The sarcamel lengths were entered in as data.
So they got the result that they actually wrote into the study as a model that that that anybody
presenting that study as a as a reason why, you know, leverages don't always match up with length
tension relationships doesn't understand how models are created and how data input into models
effects.
If you put the length tension relationship in at the beginning with the assumption that the active
link tension plateau is at 45°, then you'll get the output at the other end, which is the active
link tension relationship is at 45°.
How people miss this stuff I don't understand.
I mean, you don't need the outcome.
That's a pretty good way of going about it.
Input equals output because there's no change.
So that's that's not what that study is showing.
But yeah, ultimately leverages will end up, or rather active and tension plateaus will end up
matching leverages literally just because of how soccer Med Genesis and soccer Med loss works.
When you've got passive tension or not having passive tension in the range of motion, you're working
for people who are listening, who are actually following and are interested in the active linked
insurance relationship and how it works.
Let me try and resent the challenge as clearly as I can.
So these people who are, you know, understanding the material, they've understood that basically
neuro mechanical matching has to be the guiding principle at least down to the muscle region level
that is going to be doing the movement.
So they've kind of followed neuro mechanical matching to a certain point and they've gone OK, we've
got the region of the muscle and all of this region has leverage.
Now within this region, we're now going to start to incorporate the active link tension
relationship.
But you could stop, you could stop there, right?
And you could say that's all the moving parts we need it for neural mechanical matching.
Don't.
Need any?
Yeah, you could at this point, you could now just say all of these sub regions are now going to get
recruited in the order of their leverage.
You could just do that.
And that's what neural mechanical matching does.
It just neural mechanical matching is accepted by everybody either tacitly or, or or not right down
to the point where we're dealing with different regions of a muscle area that has leverage.
Nobody can argue with that.
They do argue with that, but they're wrong.
I mean, they're just, it's just, they're insane really.
So the, the point that we're, we're talking about then is once you get to a region that does have
leverage to do the thing that you want to do, what area within that muscle now is going to get
activated first?
Are we just carrying on with the leverage, which would be Occam's razor?
It's like, so Stockholm's razor carry on with the same thing that got you here and it kind of
finishes the movement and you get maximum efficiency and you get pretty good if not maximal force
output anyway, even with respect to the efficiency.
And also over time, your plateau of your active linked intension relationship migrates to the same
location as your leverage and you end up with maximum force as well.
So absolutely everything is going right for us in this scenario.
Perfect, absolutely perfect scenario.
In contrast, you could say, OK, well I'm going to try at this point and incorporate the active
length tension plateau into my assessment at this point, you now.
Argue neuromechanical matching to get to this point anyway.
You have correct.
And at this point, you then want to introduce something that wasn't there and is not necessary to be
there.
And now you're going to say, oh, we're now changing things to maximize force output or torque
output.
Pick one.
Tell me which one it is, either muscle force or joint torque.
And you're now optimizing for torque output, let's say to be generous.
And so you're going to have to choose between the OR ultimately you could say, well, if I've got the
ability to measure external torque, which is doubtful, but OK, if you can do it in reference to the
exercise that you're doing.
OK, fine.
So you can kind of measure your torque output by proxy from the exercise that you're performing.
Fine.
OK, so I'm trying to do that now I need to choose and go, OK, well I'm now going to use a region
that has a sub region that has better leverage but worse active intentional relationship.
Or conversely, I'm going to use a region that has better, you know, active intentional relationship
but worse leverage.
So one of the two.
And to do that, to do that, you need to firstly tell me why we are maximizing talk now and not
efficiency of talk.
So you need to tell me why that's happening.
Because in the context of everything that's gone before, we've got no reason to believe that that's
the case, no biological imperative to tell us why that should happen.
In contrast, we've got a very strong biological imperative to preference efficiency.
Secondly, so that's the first problem.
First problem is tell me what the context is that allows us to maximize torque or muscle force.
And let's be generous, say muscle talks.
It makes more sense rather than efficiency.
Secondly, you're going to have to tell me why we're changing from the efficiency directed scheme
that we're using up to this point to now using a force or or torque oriented scheme instead.
So there's even a shift in the way that the whole process is working.
Because as I said before, you can imagine you could just carry on all the way to the end and just
work the way it's been working up to this point.
You have to change that and tell me why there's been a shift.
And thirdly, you have to tell me what the guiding principle then is for the entire process because
we've had a a change in the guiding principle from efficiency to start with to force output or
torque output.
Secondly, that there's been a change.
One thing up to the regional point has been efficiency.
And then secondly, it's been torque output.
So why have we changed what is and what sits over the top of that to make that happen?
Those are the three things that I would ask in order in in descending order of importance to
understand what it is that's actually going on in someone's model where active intention
relationship plays a role.
Yeah, if the model becomes more complex, it surely has to have either more evidence behind it or do
a better job explaining than the more simple version of that model.
And at the moment we have a simple version of the model that has more evidence behind it and does a
better job explaining.
And doesn't need an overriding principle because it just follows its own principle the way through
to the end.
So what I'm interested in is why is there a shift in the way that the brain is controlling things
from the first part, which is just leverage, to the second part, which is leverage plus local factor
determining force output irrespective of efficiency.
And then thirdly, what's the reason for that?
What's the guiding principle that explains why that has to happen?
They're all related questions, but they're three separate questions that I would want answers to,
yeah.
OK, well let's see if we get any answers and if we do, we'll do another episode.
I'm sure if there's anything interesting that comes out of this, but otherwise I think we're done.
Is anything else you wanted to conclude with?
No, I'm good.
OK.
Thank you everyone for joining us, and I hope you'll join us again next week.