Episode: 046 How fast can you grow?
URL: https://open.spotify.com/episode/2Cgqwmb3iRCwaKmK7d8O9M
Published: 2026-04-07
================================================================================

Welcome back.
Thank you for joining us for another episode of Hypertrophy past and present.
And I have an important announcement.
This is the last opportunity you've got to get on our early bird e-mail list for our certification
course, which is you'll well, it's going to be going live this week.
So if you're on the early bird list, you're going to get an e-mail in a few days time and it's going
to tell you exactly how to sign up.
You don't want to miss it.
So if you're listening to this and it's still like, hmm, maybe before Wednesday, then jump on and
put your e-mail in the link in my bio and Chris's bio.
If you're listening to this and it's after Wednesday, then you may have missed out, but give it a go
anyway.
Jump on, check your e-mail in our bio and maybe you'll be lucky, but probably not.
How are you doing today, Chris?
I'm doing OK.
Thanks, Jake.
So we've spent the last couple of weeks talking about what our certification course entails and
we've put out online the curriculum, the 12 different topics we're going to cover.
Do we want to say anything about it today or just point people back to our social media posts if you
want to learn more?
Yeah.
I mean, guess we've got all the material on social media.
We've got the 12 topics, we've got the kind of details of how the course works with the kind of
monthly presentations and the monthly case studies.
Yeah, I think we've probably given all the information already.
So we've talked about it in the last two podcasts, I think.
And yeah, also information on social media.
And of course, we'll be talking about it a lot on social media in the next kind of 48 hours as well.
So I think we can probably leave it there.
Yeah, I think if you listen to this episode, you've probably listened to other episodes and you
probably know all about it.
If you do have questions about it, though, then by all means let us know.
We're going to put up AQ and A, both each of us respectively over the next few days.
And then let us know any questions you've got about the certification that will be coming up
already.
Let's jump into it.
So I'm going to start with a almost said silver era.
I'm going to start with a golden era plan.
Now.
I actually really like this plan.
I think there's a lot to talk about this.
So this is it's technically a Frank Zane plan, but it is not a plan that he personally followed.
So it was a plan that he put out as a a beginner plan.
And he did talk about sort of way you can progress it and you can add a bit of volume to it and
whatever else.
And he did sort of make the point that while this is an amazing plan for beginner or for someone who
maybe has had a little bit of time away from the gym and they're getting back into it, he did point
out that, hey, this is all you've got time to do.
Or, you know, you don't wanna add more work to your your workout like plenty for you or you're busy
or whatever.
This is fine.
This is certainly gonna be, you know, an acceptable intermediate onwards type plan as well.
But once you've had some time doing this plan, there are ways you could progress it further.
And I'll mention kind of what he said about how to do that in a moment, but for now, let's just
cover the plan.
So bear in mind, Zayn, we're talking late 70s.
We're like full on goal in era now.
We're about two decades after people have started using anabolics.
Zane was, you know, he was obviously known for very sort of symmetrical aesthetic sort of look, not
just like, you know, mass on mass, but really quite pleasing aesthetic.
And the the plan that we've got here, it was a full body done three times per week and starting with
single sets.
So very sort of silver era type outline.
Now we start with a lying leg raise.
And he did sort of mention this AB work was kind of a little bit like a warm up as well.
OK, so he had a lying leg raise crunches and then he, I think he called it seated twist.
It was basically sitting down with a broomstick over your, your back like in a sort of like a, if
you had a, a bar for squat sort of position and then you're literally just twisting side to side.
That was the AB work and he was doing sort of 20 ish repetitions of each of those except for the
seated twist.
He said start with 20 work up to 100.
Obviously that's not going to be a significant hypertrophy exercise.
He wasn't even insinuating you're going to take that to failure.
It was largely, I guess he was looking at it as some AB work and then some warm up type work.
Now the bulk of the work started with the next exercise, which was a front squat.
So we had one set of 10 front squat.
Now after each exercise, this is interesting.
He did a stretch, so he did the front squat and then he did a quad stretch for 10 to 15 seconds in
each leg.
Then he went to a single set of a, I'm calling it a front foot elevated split squat.
He called it a lunge.
But if you look at how I performed it, it was front foot highly elevated, like significantly
elevated, one side at a time, 10 lunges, 10 split squats, and then swapping to the other side and
then doing a quad stretch for 10 seconds in each leg.
After doing that as well, he then went into a standing calf raise, one set of 15, and then after
that again a 15 second calf stretch and then a frontal plane lat pull down a single set of 12 and
then doing a 15 second lat stretch after that and then an incline dumbbell and neutral grip press.
And that was a single set of 12 and then a 15 second PEC stretch like a a doorway stretch after
that.
And then a single set of 12 dumbbell pullover again with the chest stretch after that.
And then I bent over barbell row and meet grip one set of 12 and then a latch stretch for 15
seconds.
And then I seated dumbbell overhead press a single set of 12.
And then he did a rear delt stretch after that and then standing barbell curl for single set of 12
and then AI guess a biceps stretch.
He had his arms sort of as outstretched behind his back for 15 second stretch.
And then dumbbell triceps overhead extension for single set of 12 with the triceps stretch after
that.
And he concluded with a single set of gripper.
They call it, he called it a gripper.
It is literally like a a gripping aperitus that he had.
He did a set of 12 with that and then he also finished with a set of outstretched behind his back
stretch, but this time with his hands pronated.
Now a couple of additional points I wanna make so single set for all of these.
OK, Now he did say you can after you've gotten used to this, you can work up to two sets.
So I think we've got I should've can and I think there's 14 exercises here, 14 or 15 thereabouts,
including the AB exercises.
So by the time you work up to two sets, we're, we're talking, you know, high 20 sets per workout.
And he did say when you get to that point, he said, yes, you could add more stuff.
OK, you could add more exercises.
But at that point, eventually you're gonna run out of time to be able to do everything.
And he made some really stupid observations here.
So he said not only are you gonna run out of the time that you need to, to add more work, add more
exercises, but he said what you're gonna notice is at the end of the workout, the exercises you do,
he said they're gonna become neglected.
Essentially, you're not gonna perform them as well.
And so he, he did suggest basically at that point, if you're an advanced lift and you need to be
adding more exercises, you may be better off going to a two way split because you simply may not be
able to fit everything you need in.
He also said if you're doing cardio, don't do the cardio before the workout.
Do the cardio after the workout. 1015 minutes of cardio.
I think he said 12 minutes, but he said if you're doing it before, it's going to subtract from the
your performance in the workout itself.
Interesting observation.
And then lastly, I thought this is quite cool.
And then especially given our conversation actually before we started recording, he, he was asked
how long to rest between exercises and he said rest as long as you need for your breathing to return
back to normal.
So I think some interesting observations as to how to apply this work out.
What's standing out to you about all this?
OK, so quick clarification.
How many times a week is he doing this?
That's three times a week.
Three times a week.
Cool.
So this feels like a silver era programme.
Absolutely, yeah.
I mean, absolutely feels like a silver era programme with a slightly better exercise selection,
probably mainly because of the equipment availability.
I mean, honestly, this is really, really, really good.
Really good.
I mean, I'm just kind of ignoring the kind of leg raise and crunches and kind of twists and get
pissed off and you've got.
To look, to be fair, those.
Sizes without that.
Yeah, OK.
OK.
So 13 in total then.
So even if you even if you were to look at some of that, like the leg raise, he's he's saying, you
know, instead of 10 to 30, like I said, a 10A single set of ten leg raise, that's not too bad.
You get a bit of rec feminine, you get a bit of like it could be worse.
Yeah, crunchy.
Sort of.
Yeah, I mean, if it's genuinely loaded appropriately and it's stable, then I haven't got a problem
with it.
I'm that's, that's just, I'm just kind of wrapping it up into kind of stuff that I think is love.
But I agree with you, if it is done properly, it could actually be a very valuable rec fan exercise
and totally valid in that context.
And that actually then slightly kind of reduces the number of criticisms that I've got.
I see where you're going.
If we do have a proper rec firm exercise, then I don't have to then say, well, you know, I'm missing
a rec firm exercise because I'm not.
I mean, I think the duplication of the quad exercises is unnecessary.
Having a front squat followed by a split squat just seems to me to be a little bit, you know, kind
of superfluous.
And we haven't got, as I can see, any hamstrings in there.
I think which is so silvy error.
Of him, which is so silvy error of him.
Yeah.
So I mean, OK, fine.
So we've got no hamstrings in there, which, you know, seated leg.
Changing the split squat for a seated leg curl would be kind of a huge step forward.
And then what else are we missing?
I mean, again, depending what people want, you know, they could have a hip thrust in there and that
would add, add some glute work.
But other than that, really my only complaints then come because we've got the frontal plane pull
down and he's got something which is close to a title plane.
I'm not a fan of bent over Barbara Rose.
I think they basically kind of the Barbara is to have it moves you around and you end up just kind
of becoming a low back and mentor based exercise.
So I don't think it's a great thing for most people most of the time.
But you know, it starts to plane.
So OK, if it's the more or less started to.
Plane, I mean, obviously he's not using any machines in this work out, you know, like I would say
been over 1 dumbbell row is going to be a better choice here, but other than that, he's probably
gone with the best option.
And then after that, yeah, my only complaints are related to the stability, which is related to
equipment availability.
So it's not really fair to criticize him on those points at all.
It literally just saying, hey, look, you know, we can use machines to do this in a way that involves
less extraneous muscle mass usage.
So you're getting more central motor command going where you want it to and you're getting more kind
of stability.
So again, you're getting total levels of recruitment being higher.
So, you know, I think, yeah, my only other complaints would be related to stuff that he had no real
control over, which is, again, not really fair to criticize him for.
So honestly, this is probably the best golden era programme I've ever seen.
So your point there with this squat and this split squat, and I agree, obviously if we could turn
that into a leg extension as an example, that would be a better option here.
But again, no, he's not using machines.
So I understand this, but I, I don't want to pick up on that because obviously as it stands, there
is obviously a significant amount of overlap and it's not really achieving much else, right?
But if you look at the structure of the workout he's got, with the exception of the calf exercise,
you know, he's got the frontal plane lap pull down with a bent over.
So he's got two loud exercises.
He's got the incline chest press and he's got a pullover.
So he's got 2 chest exercises.
Like he's, he's largely working off kind of two exercises per muscle group.
And given that he didn't have the availability there potentially to do a loaded direct fem exercise,
if you wanted to stick with two sets of stimulus, he's actually made a fairly good choice because
the second cord exercise he's used is a unilateral exercise.
Sure.
And I guess, well, it's kind of unilateral, isn't it?
I mean it's, it's kind of maybe 7030.
So yeah, I mean it's moving towards unilateral territory, but with the potential benefit of having
that real leg is the stability.
The the issue with split squat is that it naturally allows you to sit back more so you get more hip
extension relative to knee extension.
But the elevation of the front leg and cancels that out and pushes you back to being more quad
dominant again.
So in, in terms of what you're describing, yeah, he is pretty much doing what you're kind of
suggesting, which is trying to turn his second exercise into a more focused quad exercise in the
first one.
But again, my question would be really, is that good use of kind of energy and resources when he's
missing a couple of muscles?
Yeah, he's good.
No hamstring work in it all exactly.
Yeah, potentially A hamstring exercise would be a better choice.
He also, I didn't mention this at the start.
He also suggested if you were going to do a SEC, a second set, then aim to use the same load or
heavier and you can also if you need to reduce repetitions.
I thought that's an interesting observation as well because I think essentially he's pointing to a
post activation potentiation effect.
So he's I think he's alluding to the fact that you're probably going to be stronger in that second
set because you're not, I'm assuming you're not doing any, any warm up set for these exercises.
You should actually be able to use a heavy load.
You'd have to take some rest to do that, but yeah.
Well, he did say rest until your heart rate is back to normal.
But most people are not doing that that we'll talk about that perhaps in a future.
It's not episode.
Yeah, exactly.
Like to talk about the stretching stuff before we move on though, because it's really interesting
that he's done this.
One of the most common questions I get about static stretching is actually not when to do it because
most people have kind of, and obviously he's doing it kind of within the workout between each or
just have to reach exercise.
And I'll comment on that in a moment.
But most of the time I suggest people that do it straight after the workout because largely
speaking, your kind of mobility and aesthetic stretch isn't as affected by your strength training
workout as the other way around.
You do your stretching before your workout, you've got a chance of creating some fatigue mechanisms,
probably mostly local in terms of calcium I'm later, but potentially also in the sort of the CNS.
And that's then going to blunt the adaptations that we're trying to get in the workout.
So we want to kind of do our static stretching after the workout.
He's kind of doing it after workout in the sense that he's doing it after each excess.
He's avoiding the local kind of interference effect of static stretches, but he's not avoiding the
CNS effect.
So he's kind of halfway house really.
But you know, for the purposes of weight doing, you know, it's not, it's not horrible, it's just I
wouldn't choose to do it like that.
Well, I also would choose in these exercises where he's doing 2 exercises per master group.
I would choose just to do it after that second exercise.
To the second one, yeah, that would be a a small correction that you would probably make if you
wanted to follow this as a routine, more or less I've written you'd probably want to do that.
Yeah, I agree.
The question that I get most is not anything to do with that.
It's actually related to how long to stretch and whether to break the stretch up into segments.
So this is a really interesting question and probably something that I'll end up writing a more kind
of nuanced kind of article or FAQ entry about at some point.
But the kind of the starting point is that the duration matters in so far as it's like stimulating
reps.
So if you're kind of stretching a muscle to the point where it's now on the descending limit of the
length tension relationship and you're creating a passive tension mechanical tension stimulus for
psychomerogenesis, then basically that is then now equivalent to a stimulating Rep zone.
So you're now doing stimulating reps, but on the kind of passive tension side for psychomerogenesis.
So yeah, if you stretch for a little bit longer, you're going to get a larger effect.
Two important things to observe, though, largely speaking, and this is the bit that I need to kind
of spend some time working through the nuance on, but largely speaking, breaking that up isn't
really going to matter.
So if you do like a 10/15 second stretch and then wait and then another 10-15 second stretch, it
really is going to be the same thing as doing a 32nd stretch if the actual range of motion is the
same, more or less.
Now, again, there's a little bit of nuance around there because of the behaviors of the kind of
sarcomeres and the mussifiers, but broadly speaking, it is kind of going to get you to the same
place.
So you can kind of just think of like the total amount of time.
So if you're the kind of person who can sit in a stretch for 3045, you know, 60 seconds and that is
OK, fine.
If you're the kind of person who just needs to take 510 seconds every kind of 15 seconds, again,
that's totally fine.
It really doesn't matter.
So I kind of like answer the question in that way is to say, you know, largely speaking it's the
total amount of time to a particular range of motion that's the key factor for driving psychometer
analysis from static stretching.
The other thing to note is that like strength training, there is a very strong dose response, non
linear dose response of psychometer genesis to static stretching duration.
So basically if you look at the animal models, it really does look way, way more pronounced than the
strength training stuff.
So if you get a strength training study that or metro analysis that shows a non linear dose
response, it kind of got this nice sort of curve going up to a plateau wherever, you know, that may
be sort of anywhere between, you know, six and eight sets per workout, whatever the number is.
If you look at the static stretching stuff, they've basically just got number of minutes of
stretching per day in animal models and it literally just kind of jumps upwards and then plateaus.
So they've kind of got the crazy numbers, Like they'll go up to like 24 hours of stretch position
normalisation in some animal models and say, you know, does 24 hours, you know, give me appreciably
more psychomerogenesis than 12 hours.
Not really.
And like basically it jumps up from kind of up to really, really high levels within about 30
minutes.
And you're getting kind of most of your gains within an hour across the whole day.
So you're getting enormous amounts very, very quickly from your static stretching.
Of course, people are going to focus on these numbers and go, oh, I'm not going to do 30 minutes of
stretching a day.
That's not the point.
I'm saying that it's a nonlinear dose response.
It's like a little bit is going to go a very long way and you start adding a lot more.
It's not going to get you that much further on the route to where you're trying to go with that.
The key thing is just getting exposure to that particular range of motion, you know, and therefore
triggering psychmogenesis in the 1st place.
And of course, remembering that you have to keep on increasing that range of motion if you actually
want to kind of continue making progress.
So it's not like you can just go, oh, I'm stretching to this range of motion every day for a week.
I'm like, yeah, OK, that's going to stop working after like the first three days.
So the range of motion has to improve.
And that's basically the equivalent to progressive overload in static stretching.
In the context of this workout plan, so he's obviously using a stretch after each exercise, but
based on the purpose of it, if we're assuming it's for the benefit of stretch mediated hypertrophy,
then some of these exercises that would be redundant doing that stretch for, wouldn't it?
Yeah.
So I mean, ultimately everything comes down to whether or not the muscle fibers or the sarcomers can
reach the descending limb in the context of the thing that you're doing.
So with a stretch position exercise, obviously you're getting maybe only half the muscle exposed to
the active kind of situation in which you're going to have passive tension producing
sarcomyogenesis.
So you still have the ability to then access the top half of that muscle with the static stretch.
But even then, some muscles, you know, probably aren't going to respond very well to a static
stretch situation situation no matter what, sorry to a passive tensions in that situation no matter
what you do, whether it's a stretch position exercise or a static stretch.
I mean, ultimately, I think that probably only really applies to things like the triceps, maybe the
biceps, I don't know.
I mean, again, the problem is that we kind of run into a bit of a sort of the limitation on the data
because not many people are out studying what happens when you static stretch biceps, brachy and
humans.
Yeah, OK.
Yeah, fair.
So we don't don't really know for sure.
Interesting.
OK.
Any other observations on Zane's full body begin at.
Plan, I really like it.
I think it's, I think there's, there's tiny little things here and there that you know, you could
change if you exercise selection issues, update it for using machines.
But honestly, three times a week doing this, cut the fluff out obviously.
But you know, three times a week doing 10 exercises for one set of 10 each to failure.
You know, switch out the sort of split squat for a seated leg coat and honestly, or, or a stiff leg
deadlift if you want to keep it with the free weight kind of theme.
Honestly, that's brilliant.
It really is.
Yeah, yeah.
I thought when I came across this as a golden era plan, this is just.
A golden Aeroplan tool.
It's a teleported silver Aeroplan into the golden era.
It's brilliant.
I like it a lot.
It's really good so.
Where are we going?
We, we actually want to talk about, I guess a little bit relevant to what Zain saw me here, where he
says, OK, you can do this for a certain period of time, but at a certain stage he's saying, look,
you're probably going to need to do something else.
You'd want to keep progressing.
And we're going to talk about, well, what does it mean to keep progressing?
How fast can 1 progress?
How fast can one actually build muscle?
And what do they need to do consider continuing to do that.
And you've answered that just now for psychogenesis.
And you made the point that, hey, if you're wanting to continue adding Sakamira Genesis, you
actually need to continue that stretch increasing over time.
So that's one adaption that we can look at, but what else do we need to consider?
So I'd like to kind of start by answering, start answering that question by basically kind of
systematically going through a bunch of kind of errors or problems that I'm seeing kind of people
wrestling with at the moment.
So this is going to kind of start by just ticking through some issues and then we'll kind of move
towards, you know, kind of the goal of talking about that later on.
So really the first thing I want to tackle is the when, when we're making progress, obviously we're
we're aiming to see strength gains.
So that's our kind of metric in the gym.
If we're kind of because most people are not going to be working on the basis of how they look on a
day-to-day basis.
What they're going on the basis of mostly is they go to the gym and they kind of do their strength
training program.
And hopefully it has enough consistency in it to be able to see you making progress over time.
And that progress by definition is going to be in the training weights that you're using.
So all reps that you're doing for a particular weight.
So what we're looking for then is that improvement in strength or repetition strength or, you know,
gym related numbers over a period of time.
And you know, the first thing that we're seeing at the moment is that people are still arguing about
this relationship between strength gains and muscle size.
So they're like, there's no relationship between strength gains and muscle size.
Therefore, what you're doing in the gym, improving your the kind of numbers has nothing to do with,
you know, kind of the muscle mass that you're gaining.
Let's just kind of walk through this because I've done it before, but we're still seeing that
problem kind of, you know, being kind of encountered in the industry today.
So the reason why people are saying that strength gains and size gains are unrelated is because you
can achieve adaptions that contribute to improvements in strength that do not involve improvements
in size.
So I can do a strength training program that is explicitly trying to avoid improvements in muscle
size.
I can use very low reps, I can do singles.
I can do a lot of focus on my coordination with the lift.
I can aim to do isometrics with limited muscle mass and improve motor improvement.
I can deliberately strip to my program so it doesn't have, you know, the capacity to continue
gaining muscle mass over the week by doing less frequent kind of workouts or limiting the number of
stimulating reps in each workout.
Yeah.
That's an interesting one.
Yeah.
You could actually just train do a couple of sets every 10 days or something.
You absolutely, you could literally just once a week, you could go in the gym and you could hear a
bunch of singles or double S or triples or whatever and you could come out the following week and do
the same thing again and.
That's really interesting because what's cool about that is you're letting yourself actually
hypertrophy something because all those other techniques you were just talking about, you're kind of
trying to avoid any hypertrophy.
But in fact, if you, because let's say you had a, an athlete, a fight or whatever where they can't
actually gain any weight.
I've not thought about doing it that way where you say, well, we're going to let ourselves use a
strategy here that is going to gain some muscle, but we're just going to do it so infrequently that
we've lost that muscle again.
Yeah, yeah, absolutely.
So you kind of just go in and hit a bunch of triples on the squat once a week.
And you and the interesting thing about that, that's different from the other technique where you go
in and do some singles, you go and do some isometrics and you just try and limit how much volume
you're exposed to.
The chances are that by producing hypertrophy, you may also therefore, because we don't really know
how lateral photo admission works or we don't know how it works, we don't know how it's again, we
know how it works.
We know broadly how it's stimulated.
We don't really know what's going on like in detail in either of those two things.
So you could end up potentially with a bunch more lateral fortune mission, which would be really
interesting because that would then mean that you would have that adaption, but potentially it would
be retained and your hypertrophy would not be retained.
So there's some really interesting stuff around that that you can do.
And obviously, you know, kind of continue exposure to the heavy location tendons to be stiffer and
and there's a whole bunch of things that are going on that people are missing.
But fundamentally, yeah, you can gain strength because there are a whole load of other mechanisms
that contribute to strength gains that are not increases in, you know, my fibula kind of number.
So, you know, there's that opportunity.
So for that reason, people are focusing on this and going, look, because you can gain strength
without size, therefore there's no relationship between size and strength.
And like, cool.
Yeah, agreed.
You can kind of definitely gain a lot of strength without getting size.
The question is, can you gain size without gaining strength?
And that's the thing because if you now set up the program so that you're targeting improvements in
size and you're not targeting the other adaptations.
So like when I'm going to gym, I'm not targeting improvements in coordination because I'm using very
stable exercises, machine stuff that I'm very familiar.
Do I have the capacity to really see big changes in my strength because of improvements in
coordination on an exercise that I've been doing for the last kind of 18 months?
Not really.
So I'm sort of removing that from the equation.
Am I likely to see increases in recruitment if I'm staying in a certain Rep range with a that I've
been doing for a while on a piece of equipment?
Again, that I'm not really changing?
Not really.
Again, I'm not going to see some changes there because I would need to expose my brain to high
levels of for that particular muscle.
The only way I'm going to do that is by using a smaller amount of muscle mass or more stability.
And I'm not doing those things because I'm seeking.
So again, I'm not going to see changes in recruitment, particularly in the context of the program
that I'm doing.
And you start to go, OK, am I going to see tendon stiffness changes?
Well, again, not really because I'm not changing the load parameters, so I'm not going to see much
movement there.
So the only thing I'm really going to see in the context of a bodybuilding program is increases in
size.
So you get in the opposite way from what you were just talking about with the idea of just doing a
bunch on the front squat once a week.
It's like you're kind of moving in a direction where you haven't got that other stuff and really all
you've got is the muscle size increases.
And then it's like, well, OK, so muscle size is increasing.
Can I have an increase in muscle size without an increase in strength?
Well, no, you can't because when you add myofibrils, those new myofibrils then have cross bridges.
Most cross bridges are now going to make the muscle fiber increase in force production that's then
going to actually then transfer to the tendon.
How do I know that?
I know that because, but ultimately that muscle fibre that you're activating was activated during
the exercise that you were training and it contributed to the exercise that you were doing.
So it's going to contribute next time and it's going to contribute next time with a large number of
my febrile.
So you're going to have an increase in force production.
So ultimately you can't really have an increase in the cross breed number and because of the my
fibrillar number and therefore muscle diameter and not have a strength gain.
So this is what people are doing.
They're they're misunderstanding that there is a context.
They're misunderstanding is that yes, there is a context in which strength and size gains are going
to be, you know, di diverged from one another.
And that's when other mechanisms contribute to strength gains.
And that's because and that happened that they basically means you can have strength gains without
size gains.
You cannot have the opposite.
You cannot have a size gain without a strength gain.
And that's why when we're doing a body building program, which largely eliminates the other
mechanisms of strength gains, you are going to have a close relationship between the muscle size
gains and the increases in strength that you are seeing in the gym in the exercises that you're
doing.
Which is why I always say we've got to look at the exercise a specific strength gains.
And that is your metric for figuring out whether or not the muscle that you're trying to target is
actually growing.
And that's a really important point.
And hopefully people are consolidating that because I even see people making the point online where
assuming that strength equals hypertrophy.
And I've, I've seen that even extrapolated to OK, if I'm injured and I'm training one side of my
body and I actually see some changes where I'm able to get stronger on the side of my body that I'm
not training, therefore I've gained muscle or I've maintained muscle.
And so people are actually taking other like these, you know, neural adaptations and thinking that
that's actually somehow producing mechanical tension, producing a hypertrophy stimulus.
So I think.
What we're seeing here is illustrative of a tendency to do word thinking rather than concept
thinking.
So I was actually chatting with you about this on on Instagram earlier in the week or last week.
Because basically what we're seeing is people who take a set of words and then they overlay those
words on reality and they say the words are the words are the thing that matters.
And then they overlay on reality and go reality now has to conform with these words.
No, no, no.
The words are describing reality.
You have to go beneath the words on some of the concepts and then apply the concepts as your map for
reality.
And it should pretty much fit now, okay, the map is not the territory, but it's very, very close.
In most of the sort of circumstances we're talking about, if you use the words, you're going to get
into trouble very, very quickly because you may not fully understand what it is that those words are
describing.
So here what we're saying is that, you know, yes, strength and size gains are related, but why are
they related?
What's the concept that makes that happen?
And you say, OK, well it's because you cannot add my February cross bridges without then, you know,
producing a strength gain.
OK, fine, but can I make a strength gain in another way?
Yes, you absolutely can.
And the example you gave is great because it's like, yeah, I can do a cross education effect of
coordination and recruitment and I can end up actually getting maintenance of strength on my
untrained side or an even increase in strength my inside depending on the context.
And that's going to be okay.
Again, strength.
Therefore I must have gained muscle size.
No, that's not what happens because these are the mechanisms of strength that caused that.
But that's contextual.
So you've got to understand the concepts that sit below the words.
And I think, and again, I've, I've got examples of this that we, we've talked about, but there's
lots of situations where people just take a bunch of words and go, OK, well, that's the reality.
I'm like, no, the concepts of the reality, the words of the description, you have to understand the
concept below the actual words.
Otherwise you're going to be mapping stuff that is absolutely meaningless.
And unfortunately there's a lot of people who are just grabbing words because they're excited about
it, in interested in it, but they don't want to actually take the time to just go one step below and
go, OK, what's this mean?
You know, there's people who are focusing on words, people are focusing on concepts.
And I think that's the difference.
It's like conceptually what is actually happening?
What is actually happening here is that when you increase the most fibro size, you're doing that by
adding myofibrils.
Myofibrills are like 80 plus percent, 85% to the actual myofibular of the most fibro content.
And people are saying, oh, I know you can add sarcopasm well minimally and it's very contentious how
that happens, why it happens, how long it happens for and all the rest of it.
So you want to go down that where you're instantaneously on a very, very, very thin limb of the
tree, you know, you are way out kind of over, you know, very, very kind of long drop.
It's not really kind of sort of very stable place to stand.
But fundamentally, you know, what we understand is that most of the muscle fibre increases in size,
if not all of it is caused by adding myofibrils.
And therefore you must be adding cross producers, therefore you must be increasing in strength.
You know, and ultimately that muscle fibre wouldn't be used if it wasn't being, if it wasn't
contributing.
So you can't really say, Oh no, no, no, you're increasing size and muscle fibres aren't contributing
strength.
No, no, no, you're not.
That's not happening.
OK.
So what do we do with that?
If you're getting bigger, you're getting stronger.
So, yeah, so basically, I think that is the first really big kind of error that I'm still seeing in
kind of discussions at the moment.
And it just comes down to people not understanding the relationship between strength and size that
we're arguing about.
The second thing, which is separate but related is the definition of progressive overload.
And unfortunately this is or fortunately or unfortunately, because I guess people probably feel that
they're being attacked at the moment.
So that's that's kind of move the kind of focus of attention somewhere else.
This is not actually an error that is caused by the current kind of social media community.
This is actually an error that goes back into exercise science.
So but nobody is safe.
It's like this is exercise kind of science problem.
The idea of progressive overload in exercise science is has got problems with it because there are a
large number of people who think that progressive overload means throwing more kind of stimulus at
the muscle to force it to do something.
OK, now the other way of viewing progressive overload is that you are simply proving that the
adaption has happened, has happened by displaying a higher level of strength.
So these are the two kind of models that you see in the context of progressive overload.
And sadly, the former is more common in the SNC, more casual is the wrong word, more practical or
applied part of strength training kind of exercise science and the more practical or applied part of
exercise science relating to strength training.
People definitely see progressive overload or often definitely is not the right word.
Often see progressive overload as being something that is more, you know, kind of something that
you're trying to force to occur.
So the idea would be that you would potentially increase volume over time.
So they're they're sort of thinking in terms of like adding more and more stimulus to force the Moss
fibers to do something.
Now, reality is that isn't the way that this works.
What we're doing when we talk about progressive overload is literally just demonstrating that an
adaption has happened.
So if I do, you know, kind of three, let's have five with a weighted pull up on a Monday and I come
back on, you know, kind of Wednesday or Thursday or whatever and do the same workout again.
Then if I do exactly the same workout, then theoretically if I've increased, you know, kind of
either muscle fiber size or motive equipment or coordination, then what will happen is that actual
three sets of five will be performed with a slightly and it may not even be noticeable to me, but
slightly further away from muscular failure than the original.
That workout on the Monday.
That doesn't mean that I've gone to failure on either of the workouts I may not have done.
I have been like a rapporteur in reserve or whatever.
Maybe, you know, planning to do that, not reaching failure in either case.
And if you just keep doing the same kind of workout again and again and again, what's going to
happen is you're going to get further and further away from muscular failure until you're not
actually getting enough stimulus to really keep you in a place other than maintenance.
At which point, you know, you just kind of stay exactly where you are.
If you kind of gradually start to look for opportunities to add that extra Rep, what you're doing
then is you're displaying the fact of proving to yourself that you've actually made progress.
And now that three sets of, you know, kind of five has turned into one set of six and two sets of
five or even, you know, 2 sets of 6 and set of five or whatever it may be.
And you start to actually demonstrate that you have made progress because you are now capable of
performing the sort of the the workout with more repetitions or heavier load with the same level of
effort that you put into the original workout of three sets of five.
So that's what we're seeing really with the two different ideas behind what progressive overload
actually is.
It's like one group people are thinking, oh, I need to try and force something to happen by just
applying more and more volume or more and more something, whatever it may be to the kind of muscle
that I'm trying to train.
And the other group people are going, no, no, we're just literally displaying the fact that we've
made the adaption by demonstrating strength.
And this is related to what we were just talking about because if you understand that fundamentally
you can't actually increase, you know, muscle size without producing a strength gain, then you kind
of then look at your kind of bodybuilding program in terms of progressive overload.
And you can see immediately that therefore, if I am demonstrating strength gains, then there is a
good chance that I am achieving a muscle size increase.
Now, does it guarantee that I'm increasing a muscle size increase that I'm attaining that?
No, it doesn't guarantee because yes, I could achieve an improvement in strength through a different
mechanism, especially if I'm unfamiliar with the excise or if there's a big coordination capacity
improve for improvement or if I've got a motine increment about improvement happening, Let's say
maybe I'm doing something that I've talked about with Rob on the other podcast where we do isometric
contractions Max efforts for a short period of time to try and trigger a recruitment increase.
Maybe I've been doing some of that and maybe that now transfers into the exercise that I'm doing as
my hypertrophy accessory or even my main lift doesn't really matter.
And so I start to see those increases in improvement.
Well, that is then enabling me to do more repetition.
So it's not guaranteeing that I'm getting a size gain.
But if you look at it the other way round, if I can't display a progressive overload improvement, if
I can't actually add any reps for any weight, that is absolutely guaranteeing I'm not increasing
muscle size, because you can't get an increase in muscle size without producing strengthening.
I think most of those adaptations there that are going to increase strength without increasing
muscle mass, someone will know that they're doing them because they will program something like
asymmetrics unless it's novel exercises.
And this is one of the big issues with people who are changing up exercises so frequently.
You know, every four weeks, every two weeks, whatever it might be, because ultimately you never, you
do not know if your program is working.
This is this.
Is the, this is the third big thing that I wanted to talk about is the, is the switching of her
exercises.
So there's a, there's a, again, there's this big push behind switching exercises every month or
whatever.
You've got a, you've got even even your example of, you know, I guess Frank Zane was alluding to it,
you've got to do something different if you want to carry on progressing.
And it's actually an error of thinking because basically what they're doing is they're saying, oh,
look, you know, I've been doing these exercises for 18 months or a year, whatever.
I can't make any progress on them.
Therefore, I'm going to switch to a whole bunch of new exercises.
And yeah, suddenly you're going to see massive strength gains in those exercises because you're just
improving your coordination.
You've gone literally from a bunch of exercises you're incredibly familiar with and you had no
capacity for improving coordination and now you're doing a whole bunch of different ones.
Now, OK, if you switched from very, very multi joint kind of sort of large muscle mass stuff and you
moved in the direction of smaller muscle mass stuff with single joint stuff, you would see some
recruitment ingredients.
Maybe if you switched from bilateral to unilateral again, you'd see some recruitment increases.
So there are ways of actually making it work for you positively.
But most of the time what that's not what people are doing.
They're just switching up the exercise and they're going, hey, wow, no, I'm progressing again.
No, you're not.
You are learning a new exercise.
That's not the same thing actually, because you're now in that learning of the new exercise phase,
you are losing some of the muscle size that you were you'd achieved before because you're no longer
at the same level of recruitment.
Because your coordination is low, it'd be like saying, OK, I'm doing this same exercise, but now I'm
going to do a a less stable version of this exercise.
Like it's ultimately the same outcome.
Yeah.
Well, and that's that's assuming a positive scenario.
I mean, the negative scenario would be that you would be sort of not training exactly the same
muscle fibers, yes.
And you'd end up basically then starting from kind of a position where you were losing the really
hard earned games at the top end of the motor.
You pull from the muscle fibres in the areas that you were training uniquely in the previous
exercise set.
And now you'll be chasing the same thing but in a slightly different set of muscle fibres.
So you'd be just repeating the same problem that you've gone through before.
The idea that one can stall in growth and fix that by changing exercises is so ludicrous.
Not to say that you can't, but the mentality behind that.
Oh, I stalled, therefore I just need new exercises.
It's weird thinking again, not concept thinking.
You've got it is.
It's a very small actually.
Happening.
Yeah, yeah.
Because ultimately why would changing and we could do a whole episode in this, why would changing
exercises get you to continue to progress?
It's only going to do so because of the things you've mentioned.
It's increasing motor unit recruitment.
You're using an exercise which is now more focused on that particular muscle, maybe using less
muscle, using a unilateral, whatever.
It's a more stable version.
They're the only times you're going to continue to actually progress.
Like if you're just saying, oh, I'm doing, you know, this overhead press and now I'm going to swap
it for a different variation of an overhead press.
What?
Why?
Why would you not be progressing on the first exercise you're doing and suddenly progressing the
next one?
It's not going to work like that.
It's just such a such an odd mentality that people think I stole out on an exercise.
It's no longer providing a great stimulus.
Of course it is.
What's it doing?
If it's not doing it, it's because you you need to access more motor units.
Yeah, and what people are doing instead of accessing more motor units, instead of just accessing
different ones.
Yeah, exactly.
Yeah.
And then talking I got bigger because you're now using motor as you weren't training before, but
that's it.
So this then comes back to the point that you've made repeatedly, which is that as people advance,
they shouldn't be changing exercises, they should be adding new exercises in.
Unless you manage to find a variation, the same exercise you're doing which is now more stable or
does what you were trying to do better, right?
Which is if you're going from a free weight to machine exercise, fine.
If you're going from a bilateral to unilateral exercise, fine.
But if you're just going from one variation to another variation, it's not really suitable.
I mean, if it's a fundamentally different variation that targets a different part of the muscle
group, then you've got to find a way to add it in.
Now you can either do that by battling with your existing structure and keeping with a full body A a
A format, or you're going to have to switch to a full body A/B, A/B, A/B.
Yeah, yeah, Adding new exercises either if you wanted to be generous, you could say maybe there's a
motivational thing.
OK, if you're, if you lack the motivation to continue to do the same exercise at a high level, then
that's, that's sort of the only, I don't even want to call it an excuse, but I can understand at
that point that extra motivation from a new exercise is still doing something right.
Aside from that, it's a marketing thing.
Like if you're not changing the exercise because you found a new version which is more stable of the
current exercise you're doing, you're just changing the exercise to another equivalent exercise.
Really, it's marketing.
That's why people are doing it.
Yeah.
And I mean, like when they're writing programs for clients because they want some variety, just
because they need to, you know, they're not as obsessive as we are and they they need to have some
degree of enjoyment in the workout that comes from that variety.
Then what we're looking for then is exercises that are functionally equivalent to each other, you
know, so, you know, and that that's that's the spectrum.
There's going to be things that are functionally almost identically equivalent because you know,
literally all you're doing is changing the implement that you're using, but you're fundamentally bio
mechanically doing the same thing.
And there's going to be exercises that have a little bit of kind of grey area and it's like, are
they exactly the same?
Not really.
But in this context, they're pretty much the same, you know, and you can kind of just draw a
spectrum of from one end to the to the other where you've got things that are literally identical,
they just look different and things that are, you know, OK, there's a little bit of difference
there.
But we can kind of look through that because it's not so, so big a deal in the context of the client
population that we're working with.
And it's just cosmetic.
Yeah.
But that's done for an enjoyment which is not cosmetic because enjoyment genuinely does contribute
to motivation, which contributes to an increase in recruitment.
So it's not something we can just ignore and say to our clients.
No, you just forget about that.
You know, we actually have to say, well, we accept the fact that this is motivating you to see that
variety.
OK, fine.
Well, we'll try and work with you to make that happen.
Which I would just say, and I've said this before, that I do stand by that probably the most
motivating thing to most people is seeing results.
And I've got many, many clients who have traditionally preferred to do, you know, whether it's a
body part split or whether it's, you know, upper, lower Abcd's different workouts each time or, you
know, whatever it is, higher variety type workouts.
And I've had many people come back to me saying, actually now I prefer full body A, a, A because
they're seeing how much better they're responding to it.
So, you know, my encouragement to people is, hey, let's see how you feel on this.
Let's try it, track your progress like we're talking about today, and then see if you still find it
just as demotivating as you thought that you would have.
Yeah.
But again, I think this is one of those things that changes over time.
I mean, one of the kind of reasons for doing this topic on the podcast was because we've been
noticing that there is a tendency for many influencers to comment on how fast their strength gains
are.
And, you know, said influencers are probably in the category of people who are, you know, kind of
using pharmaceutical assistance.
You know, and what we're sort of seeing is that there's kind of a bit of a distortion about what is
normal and what is possible.
Once people have been training for a couple of years, they aren't going to see very, very rapid
strength gains on the vast majority of their exercises.
If you're doing multi joint stuff and if the multi joint stuff has a skill component like a free
weight kind of back squat or deadlift or bench press, yeah, you can kind of sort of continue to see
those improvements because you've got so many more mechanisms of strength gains working with you.
If you're kind of very much down the stable route and you're kind of working with a sort of seat to
do that press in a very similar machine, very stable set to be very friendly with your ability to
make games on that is going to be extremely limited once you've done a couple of years of training.
So when people are kind of like sitting there going oh, like, you know, I added, you know, kind of
10 lbs on my kind of overhead, my seated machine overhead press in the last kind of, you know, two
months or whatever, like and I've been training 1520 years.
I'm like OK.
But like, it's, it's not even, it's not even that you're underselling it.
I literally see people post online all the time.
These are, you know, influencers have been training for 1020 years.
And I'll be like, yeah, I'm, I'm doing it at 10 or 20 LB PB every session.
Every session.
My back row went up 10 pounds £20 next.
Week.
I'm hoping that nobody who follows us is listening to those people, but OK, fine, I mean.
I don't know if you've seen there's a guy on Instagram at the moment, I forget his name and he's
about, I don't know, 40 days or so into a self experiment where he you've.
Shared this.
Yeah, no, that's really, really cool.
Yeah.
He's using trend blown, I forget what dose, but he's he's not training at all.
He's not doing any exercise now.
I shared his before and after of about a month and you can see he's gained significant amounts of
muscle in that month not doing any exercise and barely eating.
He's basically just drinking alcohol and that's it.
But he, he, he also posted, he also posted that he's tested his strength.
So while he doesn't train, he he's done like a, a single overhead press.
I think it was either bench or overhead, I forget.
And then he's tested it again a few weeks later and that was it.
No exercise between those two time points.
And he's increased his strength by, it was like 50 lbs or something, I forget how much, but a huge
increase without doing anything.
And yes, if you are blasting gear, this can and will happen.
And I mean, it's a bit of a, it's a, it's a bit of an adjacent point, I guess to make.
But the point I want to make is if you are following influencers who are giving the impression that
as an advanced lifter, you can or should be adding, you know, 510 kilos, pounds, whatever to any
lift every single session.
Either they are changing the exercises so regularly that they're just seeing a coordination
improvement and it probably doesn't really matter for them because the gear is kind of covering over
those mistakes, or they are in fact building that amount of muscle because of the gear that they're
using.
Or any other, yeah, any, any pharmaceutical.
I mean, whatever can contribute doesn't necessarily have to be AAS, but yeah, I mean, I think, you
know, from my, my personal experience, I'm, I'm, if I'm talking about exercises that I'm extremely
familiar with, they probably fall into two categories.
There's stuff that I that is on my sort of talented side, which is generally kind of vertical
pulling.
And then there's probably stuff that is on my less talented side, which is pretty much any kind of
pressing really apart from tips.
And so on the on the kind of talented side, I can probably probably make a Rep happen, an
improvement in a Rep happen maybe once a week, maybe once every other.
On the kind of least talented side, I'm probably adding a Rep month, maybe 2 reps a month best.
So there's a bit of a difference there.
So like with pulling, I can generally get to Rep, Rep a week, whereas generally I'm pressing a Rep a
month.
That's kind of where I'm at, really.
My rule of thumb for people who are experienced is assuming we're using like a full body, A, a, a as
a foundation.
I would say I want you to aim to progress by about 1% load if possible once a week.
Or that's fast.
That's far.
Well, that would be less than a repetition a week if you imagine the difference in, say, you're
going from.
OK.
So if you if you're on 100 sort of OK.
So if you're on 100 lbs for a particular kind of machine exercise, and what you're saying then is
you want to add a pound a week kind of more or less.
Yeah, so say you're doing 100 lbs.
You're doing 5 repetitions, so rather than you'd.
Be you'd be moving up a notch.
OK, so if I was, if I was trying to go from 100 to 105, if the machine, assuming machine has 5 LB
increments, then that would be assuming that I've got a 5.
Hang on.
So if I started on like 5 reps and I worked up to 10 and that, then I could, yeah, you'd be in the
same territory, wouldn't you?
Yeah.
So I, I normally see a repetition is usually around 2:00-ish percent, 2 to 3% load change.
Obviously it's going to be variance here depending on the exercise person, but I would expect that
adding 8% if possible is going to be a lower jump, a smaller jump than adding a repetition.
Yeah, I haven't thought about that.
You're right.
Either way though, we're kind of ending in a simple place.
We're saying that the smallest possible incremental increase, I would say every 3rd workout and
you're saying maybe every two weeks, I think you said every week or two you might add.
Every week or two on something that I'm definitely good at, and every probably month and things that
I'm not good at.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
And obviously that's, you know, you're very experienced with these lifts that you're talking about.
It's not only that, not only not only that, but I've been going to the exact same gym for four
years.
Yeah.
So it's literally exactly the same machines for four years.
So my ability to move forward on like that stuff is limited to literally a Rep every couple of weeks
or a Rep every every month.
And that's that's as much as I can do now.
Yeah.
Now obviously this is totally different for a beginner and part of that is because that begin is
going to be achieving those coordination improvements as well.
But you know, I would say, look, total beginner, I want you to increase every single session.
You you will be almost every exercise, every single session.
But once you've done, let's say six months, then it's going to slow.
Slow down a lot, yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
And again, it's like this is not the same as like when I was doing my way to pull up project.
You know, that's a lot of coordination, a lot of recruitment, a lot of, you know, kind of neural
adaptations.
So, you know, I spent a couple of years getting from, you know, kind of 30 kilos hanging off my belt
to 75 kilos hanging off my belt.
And that's not territory that I could repeat in a machine situation.
It's just not going to happen.
You're not going to have the ability to do that, you know, and the same thing for powerlifters.
Powerlifters can carry on making, you know, kind of squat their bench press gains for a long period
of time.
And again, it's because you're dealing with a lot more complicated adaptations and you're dealing
within a seated overhead press or you know.
So you were talking about progressive overload before and you made the point that there's two ways
people view it.
And the first way is kind of, I guess what I traditionally had been taught, which is where
essentially forcing the muscle to adapt by exposing it to usually the language people would use is
something that it's like a stress or that's that's higher than it's capable of dealing with whatever
language they use, which obviously doesn't make any sense.
The avoidance of doubt exercises not to stress or but.
Yes, yes.
But obviously you just have to think about that idea for one second.
You realize, well, you can't.
You can't overload a muscle you can't explain.
Something to that's a really good point.
I mean like that is something that people fundamentally don't understand.
It's like, you know, overload means an excess of something means an excess of something.
It's like the muscle fibre is the thing that's doing the force production.
Show me how you can make it produce more force than it's capable to produce.
You can't, it's not possible.
It's literally impossible.
You can expose it to higher volume of stuff, which is why the people are going on progressive volume
nonsense at the moment.
Really that kind of been pushed into a corner.
It's the only thing that can really do you just kind of, but that then you just in the same
territory.
The exercise science goes when they start paradigming, you know, kind of aerobic exercise and
applying it to strength training, which is nonsense.
You can't do that.
But again, it's like you can't make the fiber produce more force than it wants to.
It's going to give you exactly the same amount of force every single time, unless it's fatigue and
it's going to be less.
So the importance of that realization is to understand that the progressive overload is not the
thing that's causing the adoption, because the way that people are talking about it in that reality
is like, this is the thing that's causing it.
No, it's not.
No.
And what you said is no.
It's what's showing that the adoption occurred.
And an, an important, I think implication of that is it tells you that progressive overload is only
going to occur at the rate that the adoption is occurring.
In this case, we're talking about muscle growth.
So it tells you how fast progress you're making.
Yeah.
And if if we accept and we can talk about this maybe more in a moment, but if we accept that as an
advanced lifter who's who's natural, they're not going to be building much muscle.
We can assume that your strength, if that's the main adoption that is adding to the strength.
In that context we're talking muscle growth.
We can assume therefore, that the strength increases are going to be fairly miniscule as well.
We should not be expecting massive increases in progressive overload.
And I think this is very liberating when you understand this, because it means you don't.
A session where you didn't progress is not a wasted session.
I think there's a tendency for people to think that oh, I didn't progress, I didn't progress this
week, therefore I didn't grow, therefore I didn't.
I didn't do anything productive.
You know, you're still doing the productive work.
You're still in like that.
You're still exposing muscle fibers, mechanical tension.
You're still giving them a hypertrophy stimulus.
Maybe that adaption is just happening so slow that you're not actually going to see that show up for
a few weeks.
Totally, absolutely.
I mean, you know, and that I mean, that is a necessary realization for us to reset expectations
about what's possible as a natural lifter.
Yeah, you know, how do we do that?
That's that that's but there are and then there are implications downstream of that.
So, you know, I think I mean, one of the implications is very popular topic at the moment because
everybody's talking about, you know, do you need, you know, surplus to grow?
I mean like that.
That's I think asking a, a question prematurely.
I think the question you need to ask in the 1st place is that, you know, have you got any scope to
add meaningful amounts of muscle size that would be supported by that caloric excess?
Because, you know, like we were just chatting before the podcast about realistic kind of
expectations for where people can get naturally.
I mean, these are not things that we've, you know, been instrumental in, in, in creating or you have
anything to do with really.
I'm just drawing on what's available online.
But you know, you can look at Casey Butts calculations, Martin Birkins calculations.
I mean, like there's a whole bunch of different ways of doing it.
But the thing that's consistent across those is that if you look at them.
And I've made this point to you just with some examples.
You know, most people are walking around at body weights that are substantially above what their
stage weight would be.
Substantially above what their stage.
Weight.
Oh, we're talking like competitive stage weight.
We don't mean like, OK, take some average person and then get them on stage.
Obviously they need to lose body fat to get on stage.
We're not sure what we're saying.
What?
We're saying is that if you're an advanced lifter, so you've been lifting, you know, like
consistently for say two or three years and that puts you sort of firmly into strong intermediate
territory, you know, and if you've been doing it properly, actually it's putting you into early
advanced, I would say.
But you know, like sort of four or five years, whatever definite, like dedicated lifter covering all
the muscle groups, making gains.
Got to a point where they're adding a Rep or so every month maybe on their main exercises, really
kind of pushing the limits.
You know, at that point, their ability to add much muscle mass is very, very tiny.
And at that point, you can look at these calculators and go, OK, so if I were to step on stage, what
would my kind of stage weight be?
You'll find it's substantially below what you're walking around at.
And people are saying, oh, no, no, I need to be in a caloric surplus to kind of continue growing
Muslim.
I'm like, on the one hand, you're not going to gain that much anyway.
And on the other hand, you're just taking yourself further away from what your stage rate would be.
You know, recomp is probably your friend right now rather than kind of try to add Muslims.
I mean, I'm always, I'm always kind of interested with people just shocked when they do the
calculation for themselves.
They just put their body height in or whatever and they kind of very quickly realise how many kilos
above that number they actually are.
I think it's, it's, it's quite a humbling experience when you realise that you probably don't need
to be eating tons of food to kind of continue your quest towards bodybuilding success.
Yeah, it's interesting and there's quite a lot wrapped up in that.
Like I think there's you're pointing to one thing I think you're pointing to is an UN unrealistic
expectation of how much muscle and naturalistic can gain.
And you know, This is why obviously we spend so much time talking about the silver era because
what's what I always find interesting when I talk about some of these silver era bodybuilders is
when I talk about them online or post photos of them online, I get one or two reactions from people.
Some people will say, man, they look great.
What do they do?
Tell me about how they're trained, etcetera.
And then I get other people who say, why do we care what these guys do?
They barely look like they lift.
OK, well, that's an insight in and of itself.
Isn't it?
Isn't it?
Because it's not the lifting that they're thinking about, it's the pharmaceuticals.
Exactly.
Well, that's a really good point.
Yeah.
So I think.
What you're seeing there is the is the ingrained belief that what modern day bodybuilders look like
is because of lifting, and it's not.
Yes, exactly, exactly.
But it's and it's a pervasive.
For it to interrupt you again, but just to suddenly have the realization it's not just about muscle
mass in total, although that has an enormous role to play.
It's also about what muscle mass you can hold with a certain level of body fat.
Because gloric restriction, the level that you need to generate that kind of stage ready performance
is massively, massively catabolic.
In that extreme end of the spectrum, massively catabolic, huge stress response for the body, you're
getting a huge glucocorticoid kind of response.
That is absolutely removing muscle mass as fast as you can or faster than you can build it, sorry,
way faster than you can build it.
So you end up losing muscle mass.
And of course the pharmaceuticals fix that.
They completely negate, and we've got studies showing this, they negate that glucocorticoid effect
and stop you atrophying in that chloride restricted state.
So even though like, on the one hand we're kind of saying, oh, you know, we're criticizing
influencers for, you know, using anabolics and simultaneously then pointing to their enormous
strength gains, but you can do the same thing again.
You can say the same influence as well.
Then kind of point to their extreme success on a diet and how lean they can get no difficulty.
And I'm like, yeah, you are not playing the game the way that a natural lifter is playing the game
because they are suffering from the huge amount of atrophy caused by the glucocorticoid that you're
not suffering from because the anabolic effect of the pharmaceutical is negating meeting that
problem.
So it's literally a completely different sport.
Yeah, it is.
There's a couple of interesting points in that because if you do look at this silver area guys, they
didn't get anywhere near as conditioned as people today you couldn't do and they exactly they
wouldn't have been able to simply.
And if they like, if they did physically get to that point, they would.
Have lost.
They would not have looked like they lifted.
They would have literally looked like they'd kind of, yeah, sort of been trapped in the in the
countryside for a couple of months and I've tried to get back to civilization.
And when people, I don't know if people are familiar with the fat free mass index, FFFF, FM, I no
FFMI.
So there's obviously a fair bit of work that's going into that and looking at at different even
historical bodybuilders and what their fat free mass index was and what seems to be achievable
naturally.
And obviously it's a bit of a contentious topic, but generally speaking, there's somewhat consensus
I guess at below 25 is probably going to be that limit there for natural limit.
Now that is so heavily influenced by someone's level of body fat.
So someone's got higher body fat and then they plugged in the information to that calculator, it'll
come out with a significantly higher factory mass index.
But as soon as someone is lean and they plug the data into it, then obviously the factory mass index
drops.
So, you know, that's something we need to acknowledge as well, is that.
Yeah, that that index is absolutely body fat specific.
So, you know, if you're competing in professional strongman and you're walking around, you know,
kind of with substantial amounts of body fat that are, you know, potentially slightly helpful for
your sport in some cases because it increases your averages, then you're going to have a massively
kind of different picture of what is possible to carry as factory masks because you don't have that
atrophy effect do 1/4 chord.
If you come to the point where you're standing on stage in a natural bodybuilding competition and
body fats down like 678 percent or even, you know, kind of depending what the competitive level is
in your area, then yeah, you're going to have a totally different picture.
Your factory mass index is going to be absolutely way, way lower than that.
So it literally heavily depends on on your body fat that you're carrying around.
So yeah, you've got to kind of expect that if you are walking around like 510 kilos above your stage
ready weight, according to one of these calculators, you'll accept you are going to lose some of
your factory masks, get where you are to where that stage ready position is.
You know, And so ultimately, and this is kind of why, you know, notice is that most people are are
just kind of misunderstanding what state they are in at any given point in time and what they would
have to actually do to get the physique that they want.
And again, I emphasize that the physique that they want, you know, if you actually want to look like
a certain kind of have a certain kind of look, maybe it's a silver era look.
I mean, that's probably the most aspiration, genuinely aspirational look we could say is feasible.
It's like, well, OK, we'll look at kind of what the, you know, fabric mass indexes of those guys,
you know, were at the body fat that they were at.
Don't try and go, Oh no, no, I want that body.
I want that look, but I also want to be body fat.
You know, you can't do that.
That's not going to, you can end up looking like a natural bodybuilder of today, you know, and it's
look, it's much smaller and it's much more defined.
And so there's a reason for that is because of the stress process that you go through and the the
atrophy that you experience and you lose that kind of muscle mass going from this position to that
position.
You know, it's like, okay, we'll look at those guys and go, okay, that's feasible.
But that body fat, that's what's feasible.
I mean, they're vastly different looks.
So that's such an important point is what, what are you actually training for?
You know, what are you aspiring to look like?
Because there's no, there's no point using the, the, the numbers and the data and, and even, I guess
like, you know, the training tools, you get to looking like someone on stage.
If you don't want to look that way, if you want to, if you aspire to look like the silver area
lifters did, then obviously that's what you should be working towards.
Like, I think that's that's such an obvious thing, but I think people.
Forgot to because again, people are word thinking and not concept thinking.
They're just going I can do this.
That's feasible.
That's a number there's take it out of context.
It's like this factory mass is feasible.
OK, well, I'm going to have that this body fat.
No, you're not.
Yep.
Yes, yeah.
So is there a way we can give people in some kind of indication, I guess as to what might be
feasible for a natural lifter to aspire to?
I mean, we've this touched on two different measurements there or two different tools.
Well, again, what you do is you simply start with the populations that you are comfortable with that
have achieved it.
So look at natural bodybuilding of today.
And OK, fine, there's going to be some people who are kind of bending the rules a little bit.
But generally speaking, there's a big enough difference between those guys and the professional
bodybuilders that you can kind of see that they're not the same thing.
You know, So what those guys are doing, they're all pretty much the same kind of kind of fat free
mass and the same kind of, you know, sort of look, you know, and it's if you like that look great,
then just do what they're doing and you know, kind of look at those numbers the same thing.
If you like look the silver area, I think it actually is aesthetically far more kind of attractive.
I think it looked way better.
But you know, do what they're doing and look at what they're kind of sort of numbers are, you know,
and they're different.
They are definitely very different.
So it's a body fat specific problem.
But as soon as you throw pharmaceuticals in, you transform both of those problems completely.
You transform the total amount of factory mass and you transform the body fat that you can hold at
that and you just push them both them into orbit.
And they're just completely irrelevant to everything that we're talking about.
And this is the problem that we're always facing because people just scroll online and they look at
what they, you know, is presented to them and they start to adjust their brain to what they think
is, you know, kind of a standard.
And the standards are just like, you know, 1,000,000 miles away from what is achievable in a, a
natural context, whether it's silver with slightly higher body fat or whether it's a modern day
natural bodybuilding, but much lower body fat really that they're just two separate goals.
But those both of those cars are just miles away from what kind of pharmaceutically assisted
bodybuilding is doing.
Yeah.
So obviously something that people say a lot of is, you know, don't, don't compare yourself to
someone else or don't you know, there's anatomical differences and there's differences in muscle
fiber makeup in this and the other.
But while that is true, it I would feel that probably the best we can do is to actually find a
natural, if you're, if you're natural yourself, to find a natural lifter who has, you know, similar
proportion, similar height than you and see, well, what was their body weight at a, you know, as a
natural lifter when they were at a aesthetic that you were happy with.
And that may be as a sort of ballpark figure, a number that you might aspire to.
Do you think that's reasonable or not?
I mean.
I would, I actually really like Martin Birkin's calculator.
I think it's super quick and, and sort of easy for most people of average sort of heights.
I mean, if you're really tall or really short, you're going to find that it doesn't work.
But I think, you know, Martin Birkin basically said, you know, take your height in centimetres and
deduct 100 and that'll give you your kind of natural bodybuilding stage kind of weight.
You know, I think that's a really great starting point.
You know, and I think if you want to then extrapolate that to a silver era without doing tons and
tons of calculations and, you know, difficult kind of math, then literally just add 10%.
So if you've got somebody who's kind of 180 and you say, OK, well then got stage way to 80, then I
would say Silver era look is going to be about 88, maybe that kind of turret.
I know that when you've looked to the date and you've seen that you've come out with numbers that
are higher than that.
You said Rich Park was 185 and he's coming out as over 100 kilos.
Yeah, obviously the difficulty with this rage is because he was competing into the, you know what,
late 60s.
But if you look at like Steve was a similar height.
Steve was about 185 and I think they claim his stage weight was something like mid nineties, 97
kilos or something.
Like that.
It's not.
That's not miles away then.
So yeah.
It's actually.
5 + + 9 or 8.5 is getting you to 94.
So you know that I'd say just add 10% and you're going to find that you're approximately right for
those kind of numbers.
Now, again, it's going to vary.
Not everybody's going to be in that territory.
And again, tall and short and that kind of thing, it's going to, but I genuinely do think Martin
Martin came with a really good kind of rule of of thumb that I think you did a really good job on
that.
So, you know, credit to him.
So without wanting to open a can of worms and send you down a huge rabbit hole here, how much
individual variance is there?
So you've got two people who are 180 centimetres and let's say regardless of what the current body
weight is.
But in terms of like maximum muscle potential, obviously we've got outliers.
But in terms of like the the average person, is there going to be sort of can you predict any sort
of continuity between two people of a similar height or is it just wildly different?
I, I genuinely think that if you're, if you are excluding outliers, then I think most people are
going to be within a couple of kilos of that, I think.
And that's, you know, that's kind of where it's interesting, you know.
But yeah, there are genuine outliers who will find that just there's nothing happening.
I mean, like you get enough slow twitch fibers and you're not going anywhere.
I mean, that's just how it is.
It's just how it is.
I mean, it's like, but what you find is that with some exceptions, most people who are exposed, I
mean, maybe it's different in this kind of current scenario.
But like in a society situation like I grew up in, when you're younger, you have the opportunity to
participate in a bunch of different sporting activities and you naturally migrated to what you were
good at and you were encouraged to do more of that.
And you ended up kind of following that on in your kind of hobby activities later on.
So, you know, people who are really good at the endurance stuff, they were encouraged to do more
kind of, you know, long distance running.
Maybe they started doing some cycling.
Maybe they ended up doing triathlon and they do triathlons as they get older.
And that's their kind of basic activity kind of hobby, you know, people who are more on the kind of
sort of track and field, more kind of speed and power into the spectrum, maybe they go take more
into the kind of sort of bodybuilding or strength sports related side.
So I think maybe today that's not the case and people just kind of pick on stuff that they see
online and go, yeah, I want to do that.
And they had no experience of knowing whether or not they're good at that.
I think maybe what we're seeing now is people trying to do stuff that they're not suited to
genetically.
I don't know.
I mean, it's an interesting sociological phenomenon.
But you know, I think, yeah, I mean, definitely are seeing people say, oh, no, I just, I do this and
nothing happens.
I'm like, it might be that you're doing it wrong, or it might be that you run out and you genuinely
do have a ton of slow twitch fibres and you're just not going to go anywhere no matter what.
You do you say that you're not going to go anywhere no matter what, but like, surely there's still.
You're going to have all of this other strength training adaptations.
You make strength gains and you know, you could probably display some pretty high strength in
reality, especially strength to the body weight.
I mean you be fright.
But do you think you literally and just not going to gain any appreciable muscle mass like those
people who are true outliers?
You'll notice it on yourself, especially if you're lean, but other people probably won't notice it,
you know, most of the time.
I mean, I think this is what Rob and I are talking about with endurance runners.
They're really frightened of doing any kind of strength training because I think it will make them,
you know, get really big.
I'm like mostly, if you're any good endurance runners, don't worry about it because it's not going
to happen.
Yeah, yeah.
Interesting.
So I think, yeah, you can push to the edges and start to find people who are just going to.
I think it's more on the like sort of hard gainer side than it is on the opposite side.
I don't think you're going to find many people who, apart from teenage boys, who can just look at a
weight and grow.
OK, fine, that happens.
I remember it happening.
You know, it absolutely does.
But everybody else outside that category is probably not going to be in that kind of opposite end of
the spectrum to a hard gainer where they literally just look at weights and grow.
No, I mean they'll, I mean you do obviously see some cases of professional bodybuilders who you see
a photo of them and they were 16 presumably before they were enhanced.
But actually some of my favorite examples of that are people who just with absurd leverages, so.
Yeah.
So what you've seen changes in muscle bodies and stuff like that?
Yeah.
So when you look at Dorian, for example, and you look at his Latin insertions, they are literally
like inhuman, you know, like you just don't see human beings with those kind of insertions.
And it's like that is something that you was just born with.
Yeah, yeah.
So there's, I guess there could be two different things going on.
So like, just because someone has amazing insertions or whatever, does that necessarily mean they're
going to gain muscle, get a faster?
Rate not.
Necessarily, but it might actually look.
Like was amazing.
Yeah.
You know, I mean, absolutely one in millions.
I mean, that is just remarkable story.
I want to jump back to progressive overload for a moment.
And I have a controversial, I think opinion on this.
And I think you might disagree with me.
And we've never really talked too much about this, but it's it's something that's played in the back
of my mind for probably a few years now.
And I think I personally, I think we place, we, myself included, maybe place too much emphasis on
progressive overload.
And why I say that is we've just mentioned discuss that progressive overload is showing one that
their training is working.
That's basically all it's doing, right?
And it's keeping one within the realms of maintaining A stimulus.
Obviously if you drift too far away from Max effort, then you're no longer achieving A stimulus.
But in the vast majority of cases, why would our training program not work?
If I'm running a program, I'm honestly I would be shocked for my program not to work OK for almost
all my clients and so I'm assuming there will be progressive overload.
But why would there not be?
How am I writing such a bad program that there's not going to be progressive overload?
Allow me to introduce you to the rest of the fitness industry.
How long have you got?
I mean, I can give you an enormous list of reasons why a program is not going to work and not
produce progressive overload.
It's either going to be because the frequency is too low, it's going to be because the volumes are
too high, it's going to be because they're using.
So I understand intensive mistakes one can make to not produce that's.
Why progressive overload is ceasing to become as interesting to you Because you know that your
program is going to work.
Progressive overload.
If you use it as a tool to establish that your program is working, it's a very fast way of finding.
People who are writing really silly programs.
OK.
Well, that potentially answers my question.
See, because what I've landed on is I think probably the most value in progressive overload is as an
accountability measure to ensure that someone is training, I'm just going to say hard to ensure that
they're actually going close to failure.
But the, the problem is that the kind of the less scrupulous trainers who are not so concerned about
their client results and just more concerned about, you know, selling units, they are not, they're
not really interested so much in their client getting the results that they, you know, kind of want.
And so they use excess exercise variety to disguise the fact that programs are not really working
very well.
So they'll throw these exercises in and go, hey, now you're making progress on this new exercise and
the strength gains are all there and it's fantastic.
And it's like, that is why sticking with a bunch of exercises for a long period of time and
demonstrating that progress, whatever is happening, is a really cool way of establishing that your
trainer knows what you're doing.
Yeah.
And I think you're way past that point now.
You know that that's going to happen.
So you're very comfortable in the fact that, you know, you don't need to rely on that metric to kind
of be comfortable and be confident that what you're doing is working.
But I think that that journey that you've gone on is something that other people still need to go
on.
And then, yeah, yeah.
And I guess I do.
Well, I don't care that much about it for myself.
I do find it a valuable tool with my clients what I'll do every time I write a new phase.
If suddenly one of your clients stopped displaying progressive over there, wouldn't you precisely
OK, why is that happening?
And that was that was going to be my point is every time I write a new phase, I will look at all of
the exercises for each week of that phase and I see what's progressing and what's not.
And absolutely, if I saw that nothing was progressing that phase, obviously I'm going to be alarmed
what's going on.
CNS fatigue calling straight to it, yeah.
Yeah, but back to my point, my program shouldn't be doing that, you know?
Exactly.
So like the Priest of Overload should be there.
I just don't think that we need to be.
It's like it's, it's I'm, I know I'm being you on, I think.
You're evolving.
I think that's what you're doing.
I think you're evolving to the point where you've you've been through the hard work section that
you've needed to go through to get to the point where it's no longer as important to you because
mentally it is.
It's not crutch is the wrong word.
It's not a crutch.
It's an important metrics, an important support or it's an important validation that we're doing
feedback that's working.
I can think of a bunch of other examples where we, you know, you would teach something in a specific
context and it's like you keep telling people, no, you must do it this way.
You must do it this way.
And then you notice that somebody who's more advanced is not doing it that way.
And so why is why are they able to do it that way?
And I can't do it that way.
So because they've got to the point now where it's so intrinsic to the way that they do things that
they've stepped beyond needing it.
And now they can operate in a more fluid and flexible way without it.
But recognizing that everywhere that it was previously guiding them and preventing them from making
a mistake, they're already now operating within that framework without needing that guideline.
Essentially, it's like a guardrail really.
It's a guardrail that stops you from going outside of your kind of recoverable volumes and doing
silly things that you shouldn't really do.
Now that you don't do those things ever, because it's just instinctive.
You don't need the guardrail anymore.
But 99% of people are going to need a guardrail.
Yeah, yeah, I think that's an interesting way to look at it.
And, and what I have felt is I've got to a point where in some ways, not in always, but in some
ways, it's become a hindrance because it's like, I know that what I'm doing is providing A stimulus.
I don't want to attach an exercise or an outcome or whatever to progressive overload knowing that it
might in fact be so slow, it might be fooling me, right.
And so I just want to have confidence that I know what I'm doing in the gym is in fact providing
that stimulus is based on the program.
There's no way that it's not, and so I don't want to get too bogged down in what the number is isn't
showing.
And sure, if over time then I don't see a change.
OK, great, let's talk about it.
But.
I don't see, but you can see how if somebody who is programming with the kind of, I mean there's a
whole bunch of people still out there who kind of a peripheral to the community that we serve.
But they're definitely in what you would call either the evidence base or science based.
And they are just still throwing bonkers amounts of volume at their kind of approach and increasing
that volume over time, creating massive amounts of accumulated fatigue, swelling and thinking that
that is hypertrophy and ignoring the necessity for progressive overload.
If you said, look guys, the need to demonstrate progressive overload for us over this six month
period of time, they would stop programming the way that they were programming because it wouldn't
work.
Yeah, I guess that's the point.
Your, your point is just contextual.
It's contextual to somebody who already knows how to make progressive overload happen because
you've, you've been operating within that guardrail for so long, it's now instinctive and natural to
you.
And now you're starting to go.
Actually, if I was allowing myself to be a little bit more flexible with this idea of progressive
overload, I could actually do some interesting bits and pieces around the edges that would still
work.
How do I now kind of free myself from that constraint?
It's like what you just do because you can.
Yeah.
I mean, it's like the conversation we've had with clusters before where the limitation is you're not
seeing the progressive overload necessarily.
Exactly.
And you know, something that I do sometimes is I'll have an exercise for a muscle, which will be the
one that I'm tracking progressive overload on.
And then I might have another exercise, which is one that I'm not necessarily tracking on because
maybe I'm using another method with that exercise.
Such a great approach.
Exactly.
And that that keeps the guardrail to a degree while giving you a little bit of flexibility.
So that would be, that would be like the first steps that somebody could take if they felt like they
really want to start exploring a program that doesn't rely on progressive Ola, they could take a
step like that.
And that would be a fantastic way to introduce the concept.
But honestly, most people, most of the time, I think they're much better off focusing on the
progressive Ola, even if it is slow, you know, because fundamentally, the guardrail exists for a
reason.
It's telling you that something's working.
Or another time it might be worthwhile like saving for myself would be if I'm introducing a new
method and I want to evaluate that method, is it more or less the same effective as something else
I'm doing, then obviously that's going to be fairly good feedback on that.
So yeah, I can see that this will obviously time see certainly pay attention to it, but I don't it's
it's a servant and I don't think it's the master.
Again, I mean, yeah, I think you're just gravitating from kind of cook to chef really as they would
seek community.
I mean, that's kind of what you're doing.
But I think you know most people who are kind of still in the phase where they're you.
Know if their program works or not?
OK, this is how you know.
Yeah, yeah.
So is there anything else to add to?
I mean, I think we've given a good framework with the numbers in terms of, you know, the, the
calculation you gave of working out what your potential stage weight would be and you can evaluate
kind of where your, your body.
Therapy I'm, I'm not, that's not my kind of area and I'm not an expert in those things and there's
other people who've done, you know, the work, the hard work of figuring out what those algorithms
should look like.
So, you know, start there, look at what they're doing.
Don't listen to necessarily what exact numbers I'm coming out with.
I just think.
There's tools there, you know, there's things that.
There are tools there and, and they they are very clear about what their contexts they apply to.
So when Martin wrote his kind of formula, he said it applies to, you know, stage, weight, natural
bodybuilding situations.
And I think people have interpreted that as kind of, you know, 567 percent that kind of territory.
And again, just check what you know kind of Martin said about it, but I think, you know very, very
approximately you add 10% to that and you're going to find that you're in the kind of ballpark
territory of of a silver area lifter more or less.
Yeah.
And if you want to double check that, then you know, look up silver area lifters that you like and
you find that sort of aspirational exactly.
Look up and you know, there can be a little bit of myth in some of that, like a, you know.
Yeah.
I mean, generally, I would expect that their body weights are going to be slightly exaggerated,
which is what I found when I kind of started my 10% ballpark figure.
And I looked and, you know, like with Rach Park, there's kind of definitely a few kilos over the top
end of that, you know, and even Steve Reeves was a kilo or so over what I was expecting.
But you know, broadly speaking, that's kind of what I would expect to see.
Yeah, yeah.
And I mentioned Fat free mass index.
It's been a few years since I looked at it, but I do remember Lyle MacDonald had several articles on
that that were there's.
Some great resources on that.
There's some great resources on that.
Yeah.
Is there anything else we want to add to this, this entire topic of progressive overload and growing
as a natural lifter and how fast one can progress and how fast one can have, how I guess a ceiling
of growth potential and all of this wrapped together?
It's really just coming down to the, the reason that we wanted to do this is because we are seeing a
lot of influencers making kind of claims and suggestions about rate of progress, which is vastly
kind of overstated for a natural lifter.
You know, and I think it's important to to start with the fact that you're going to gain a couple of
reps a month, you know, in a good scenario.
And that's going to be what it is for, you know, an advanced training situation.
You know, there's no kind of scenario where you can be adding pounds and pounds and pounds to your
lifts.
You know, every week we've met recession, as you've said, some people are claiming, which I find
absurd, but you know, there you go, you know, so it's just kind of recognising that that is, is the,
is the territory for the, you know, the sport or the activity that we're talking about, you know,
but then also there's a whole bunch of errors that people are making that are peripheral to that
around what progressive overload actually is, what it's doing, how strength can relate to
hypertrophy.
And you've got to kind of just be aware of all of that and recognise that, you know, when people are
talking to you about this stuff, they may be making those errors.
You've just got to kind of take me on board and pause the information you're receiving
appropriately.
But I think the single biggest issue really is that we've been being bombarded every day by images
and information which is firmly entrenched in the territory of professional bodybuilding supported
by pharmaceuticals.
So everything you look at is flavoured by that baseline and people are just being kind of
inadvertently conditioned to think of that as the norm.
And it's like, you'd be a lot better just kind of going back and sort of cleansing your brain by
just looking at silver era stuff, you know, and resetting your sort of expectations to what is
normal.
And if you're finding that you're looking at those going these guys don't look like they lift, then
you are in desperate need of a brain.
Do you know, one point on the silver area guys that I think is interesting that I've never talked to
you about is a lot of the time when you read these old magazines or you read, you know, interviews
or letters from some of these guys and they outline their workouts.
And, and I'm talking like the advanced workouts, like the workouts that they were actually
following, they've been following them for, you know, a period of years or whatever.
They often will say, oh, I would lift, I would do a behind the neck press and I would do that with,
you know, 180 lbs for H repetitions.
And I would do this for this many pounds for this.
And while they do obviously at times talk about, you know, trying to progress load and trying to add
repetitions, and Steve Reeves has talked about that a lot, They do often default back to this is the
way I did, I used these ways and they're not talking about it like I, I was able to lift this weight
for one repetition.
Sometimes I'll do that as well.
They'll talk about their PBS, but often they're saying, this is what I did in my training.
I did this many for this, this many repetitions.
And that to me suggests that, hey, there was really freaking slow progressive overload.
If they have a normative weight that they were doing and they just know this is the way they did for
that exercise.
Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.
That's totally true.
You know, and I think again, you just, and again, actually something really important on that, on
that observation is that you, you will find that there are definitely 2 categories of lift that
people have.
So I wouldn't read trying to phrase this in the correct way.
Obviously you can read something into what you're seeing there.
So if you're looking at people doing specific lifts like bench press or over press or whatever, you
can read something into it because obviously somebody who is approximately your height who is
achieving a certain, you know, seated overhead press or even standing overhead press if that's what
they were doing or whatever.
If you can get to those numbers for their kind of repetitions, broadly speaking, you're probably
going to be in the same kind of territory as they are in terms of muscle mass, broadly speaking.
But just be aware there will be occasions when somebody has had an obsession with a lift and they
have pushed the numbers up to absurd levels that you're not going to get close to.
So like obviously I've personal experience with this, I've taken weight to pull ups and dips to
levels that most of the people of my body height are not going to get to unless they're obsessive
about it like I was.
And there are people who are obsessive about it and they do get there and they've gone beyond, well,
I've got to, and that's cool.
But the point I'm making is that you just got to try.
And when you're looking at numbers that somebody's got, if they've got one or two lifts that are
just off the charts, be aware that that's not necessarily going to be reflective of that.
Their body physique looks like it's just that they had an obsession with and they pushed recruitment
and coordination, what have you, to levels that you're probably not going to get to unless you share
that obsession, you know?
So again, it's like just be aware that there's definitely those two different categories of number
that you're looking at.
And so yeah, full picture is required.
I think when we pause that kind of.
Yeah, I'm gonna, I'm gonna let us finish.
I just want to make one last point because I I do think it's an important one.
There are some you've mentioned, obviously very stable exercises.
You know, at a certain point progress is going to be very slow.
And there's some exercises, let's say leg extension.
It's a really good example here where you do a leg extension for years.
There's no good alternative to a leg extension if you want direct film growth.
And so I've got clients who might have done a leg extension literally for 10 years.
And if I have a client who does a leg extension for 10 years and they don't progress weight on that
leg extension anymore, I don't care.
I keep it in, I'll use another core exercise maybe as an indicator lift from that situation.
But even if you're not progressing, to go back to my point before progressive overload is, is
helping us know the program works and we can look at why the leg extension is in that program and we
know that it is achieving a goal.
So if you're if you've got an exercise which is an important, a central exercise to your program and
you've done it for a very long time and you're not progressing or progress is extremely slow on it,
it doesn't mean you need to get rid of that exercise.
Totally agree.
I mean, it's like doing a static stretch and just kind of saying, OK, well you know, I'm going to
hold this range of motion, static stretch and do this once a week for the rest of my life.
And it's like, OK, well then you'll keep the psycho Marine Genesis essentially into that motion for
the rest of your life.
Why wouldn't you?
Do a certain point.
That might be all you can hope for.
You've achieved everything else you're capable of.
So, yeah, I mean, I think that's important, you know, and maybe you would program it very slightly
differently.
I mean, maybe you do if you're in that territory where you've got, you know, 10 years of experience
behind you and you feel like there's a bunch of exercises in your program that really aren't going
to kind of move forward.
You'd probably be on the full body ABA split Bab.
Well, at that point, what you're going to be doing is obviously focusing on Modi energy recruitment.
That's the only chance you've got for anything to go up, right?
And so that's where I think it's really interesting to then maybe take that leg ascension and do
periods of time where you're putting that first and you're doing unilateral or even it doesn't even
need to be the leg ascension, it can be another.
I guess I was just trying to categorize things that you genuinely have given up on, in which case,
you know, kind of doing one set twice a week or?
I see.
OK.
And then you're just doing it.
Territory, yeah.
I mean, alternative would be to do three sets once a week, but honestly I wouldn't want to do that
if I was in a kind of place where I'd kind of got.
That's a really good point.
You, you're right because ultimately if you're doing an exercise which you're accepting is not
contributing to new growth, it's maintaining what you've got, then you can just back right off with
that and like.
That's what I would do.
Yeah.
Yeah, absolutely.
Yeah, that's, that's a a really interesting point, I think for people to think about and not not a
lot of people at that point.
OK, so you know you listening to this if you've not been in the gym for five years?
Yeah, I'm really old so.
Yeah, yeah.
So you know, may maybe someone at the five year mark, maybe we'll be in that boat possibly if
they've trained really well for that five years.
But I don't think you're going to get there before that point.
Yeah.
And even when I talk to people about the fact that I was, you know, kind of doing this kind of sort
of strength training with weighted pull ups, probably in the at least the early 90s, you know, most
people are like, OK, so doing way to post 10 years before I was even born.
Yeah, and that's reality.
You know, you said early in this episode you're still expecting on on good exercises to see a
repetition every few weeks.
You know that would be.
Kind of like.
I'm expecting to see a.
Solid, solid kind of that pull down machine that has got capacity on it.
If it's a well put together machine then yeah, I can carry on squeaking out a rapporteur here and
there.
But you know, that's that's probably the exception.
Yeah, yeah, it's very nuanced.
You know, we're, we're kind of telling people, hey, the ceiling is potentially higher than you
think, but it's also kind of lower than some people think and like.
You know, what would be really interesting is like if if you were to rotate obsessions.
Yeah.
I mean, I, I'm not sure that you can develop an obsession for something that you're not obsessed
about.
Yeah, No, I think that's fundamentally the problem.
That's why people, some people message me saying I don't get how you can get to the numbers that you
got to on a way to pull up and dip.
I'm like, honestly, there's people who blown my numbers out of the water, you know, but I think you
just have to have something kind of in your head that makes you want to go after that particular
thing.
But if you were capable of controlling that and you're able to go after it sequentially, different
kind of exercises, I think you maybe actually would get further than you could without that level of
obsession, even on the muscle size front, because I think there are gains you get when you into that
territory are quite are definitely higher, you know, and so I think maybe there's there's something
psychological there that's worth kind of poking at.
You know, if you could kind of rotate obsessions and get, I mean, I just couldn't.
Really say something.
Like hamstrings or something.
But could you get obsessed about a deadlift variation?
I don't know, maybe you could, I mean.
Yeah, yeah, I think it's going to come down to the person.
I feel like I could convince myself to get obsessed about most muscle groups A particular exercise
a.
Particular exercise, I mean, that would kind of be the kind of Holy Grail because he could go after
that and you push your numbers way higher than than you would be able to expect and then rotate and
do something different and you kind of keep that benefit.
I mean, like I said before that, you know, like from having done the kind of one arm chin stuff and
the way to pull up stuff, I can go in a gym now and mostly get to very close to maxing out most kind
of like pull down machines pretty quickly, you know, and and yeah, even then I can still kind of
make progress on them.
It just it's turned the muscle group into turn the light into something that is just so much more
kind of capable of making progress.
Or was that just, you know, kind of levers and genetic or whatever?
I don't know, but it just feels like there's more scope there.
And it's an interesting way to then program in a sense sort of specialization phases, but these
would be long phases.
We're not talking.
I mean, like, yeah.
Six weeks on a lift.
Yeah.
You're talking about talking a year or so.
Really.
Yeah.
And and again, it's, it's just kind of grinding forwards on a, on a multi joined exercise with
increasing amounts of weight until you just get until you can see that there's clear blue kind of
water between you and everybody else of your weight.
Yeah, until you're lifting silly weights and then try it again for something else.
Yeah, I don't know.
I mean, it's a really interesting thought experiment, you know?
Yeah, well, I'm going to think about it.
I'm going to play with it.
And.
We'll, we'll leave that.
One we will say, we will say a prayer for your, for your joints, ligaments.
And 10 BPC will keep me safe.
OK, thank you guys for joining us for another episode.
Don't forget to sign up to our e-mail list pre launch offer if you're not on there yet.
And if you are on there, then hold tight.
You're going to see an e-mail in your inbox in the next few days.
And if you haven't got by the end of the week, maybe check your junk folder.
And that's it for us today.
Thank you.