Episode: 058 Does mTOR determine your optimal training frequency?
URL: https://open.spotify.com/episode/74cSk2iePYXSVALTJaey9r
Published: 2026-06-29
================================================================================

Welcome back.
Thank you for joining us for get another episode of Hypertrophy Past and present.
Chris, how are you doing today?
I'm doing well.
Thanks, Jake.
We have a silver plan today, which is right up your alley.
You're going to love this one.
This is Clancy Ross.
We have talked about Clancy before, not for a while, but, and I might be wrong here, but my
recollection is every time we've talked about Clancy, we've talked about a different split.
Clancy was really interesting because he did play with different splits and he did.
So for you guys who don't know Clancy, Ross is we're talking 1940s, early 50s maybe I I forget when
he won his final competition, but for 1945 Mr. America winner.
So he's like classic silver era.
This is well and truly before Golden era, before Anabolic's were introduced and he started out in
before the set system was introduced.
OK, so if you guys don't know this, every single bodybuilder was doing single sets like that was
that's what you did?
They didn't even have the language of sets.
And he was one of the first people to actually move to doing multiple sets.
So he did single sets and then he did this thing where he kind of like would repeat exercises, but
he wouldn't do sets.
So he would do like say he was doing a squat and he might do a squat at the start of the workout and
the squad again halfway into the workout and maybe one more at the end.
So he kind of did this like funny repeating exercise thing.
And then he ended up playing with like 2 a day.
So he would do like upper body and lower body in the same day and split the workouts up and then he
went back to full body.
And then he started doing multiple sets and he just like was really experimental with a lot of what
he did.
So I think he's quite an interesting figure and I think we've talked about his split routine.
I think we've talked about, I forget what other routines of his today, but here we have a classic,
classic silver era routine of his.
And this came from 1945.
So again, this was his, I think he talked about this in the in the lead up to his Mr. America
victory.
So this is part of the routine he'd been following and he used this at the start of his, I guess,
competition prep or whatever you would kind of call it, his road to missing America.
And we've talked a little bit about this in the past.
I kind of had language that would use like bulking routines or power routines.
He called this a bulking routine.
Basically.
They kind of had like they're bulking and then they're reducing or they're defining.
And we have talked about defining routines in the past, defining routines.
They tended to add more exercises in bulky routines.
They tended to, I guess I'm going to use such a like bro term here, but the kind of built a base
with like multi joint exercises and then that would move into some of these more kind of finesse
single joint type stuff.
So here we've got his bulking routine that he sort of started with before his competition prep and
it involved full body three times a week, just like almost every other bodybuilder at this point in
time.
And he would do single sets of 10 repetitions for each of these exercises.
Exactly the same each exercise, nothing changed.
Nice and simple.
So we start with a barbell standing overhead press.
We then go into a barbell curl, then a barbell upright row, a barbell bench, which he probably
called.
What do they call it back then?
Prone.
I forget what they called it, but they didn't call it bench.
And then a barbell incline bench, a barbell deadlift, a barbell squat, a leg press, which he
probably did that with the barbell at that point in time, so where they're bouncing the bar on the
feet.
And then he did a calf raise.
That was it.
Same workout, three times a week We have, what do we have, 3456789 or 10?
I can't count 9 or 10 exercises, single sets of each.
I'm all right.
Do you like this plan?
I do, I mean, obviously three times a week, single sets, 10 Rep Max or so.
I mean, great start as a structure exercise.
Selection is not perfect, but there's some really good stuff in there.
I think again, if I were to pick out a few things that I don't like, I don't like the lack of a
decent back exercise.
I think that's just, you know, kind of very silly.
I think a wide grip pull up mean a wide grip up and a narrow grip up together would have would have
been great additions to this program and you could have easily lost the leg press or the the spot
whichever 1 you you know, kind of like.
I mean, surely the leg press is not doing much if he's doing that with a I've never tried.
I've never tried balancing a bar on my feet, but I can only imagine you're not getting a lot out of
that exercise.
Exactly.
So just drop the leg press and, you know, I think the upright row probably isn't doing, you know, as
much as it it really should be doing for having a place in the program when you're doing this few
exercises.
I think, yeah, I'd, I'd have either a a narrow row and a wide group pull up, which we would my
preferred route or, you know, to pull up variations if if, you know, equipment is really an issue.
So, yeah, I think that would probably, you know, kind of bring the program to a really much, much
better kind of designed very, very quickly.
I mean, you can obviously, you know, change it to a lot more than that, but those would be my kind
of tweaks to make it instantaneously a lot better.
The fact that he's got a deadlift in there is great because already we've got some kind of
hamstrings work in there.
I would probably convert that to a stiff leg.
I think that would probably be even better at that point.
Yeah, off blocks, You know, a lot of these people were doing deadly soft blocks.
That's probably it's going to be closer to a stiff leg.
They were being used at this point in time.
I do find the upright row interesting and I think you could make an argument for where it could have
a place because he's got he's got an overhead press, he's got a bench, he's got an incline bench,
He's got a stack of triceps work and it's interesting to get more shoulder work in there without
getting more chest, more triceps.
And he's done it without dumbbells.
You know, like if he's if he's just the hexes to a barbell, it probably wasn't the worst choice if
you wanted more more delt work.
More middle delt work, yeah, I mean obviously you would get a pretty decent amount of posterior delt
work with any kind of side to play in pulling motion.
So I mean you could argue that the absence of the of the pull up in there is probably, you know,
partly contributing to the reason why an upright room might be in there.
Yeah.
I mean, honestly, it's a fantastic start to a program again, you know, so with many programs today,
we'll just be obliterated by this.
I mean, it's, it's a really great startup program, literally with two or three tiny, tiny changes.
I'd be happy to do that.
Yeah, yeah.
And again, using a barbell, that's all you need.
It's you could do this in a home gym.
You know, it's not too dissimilar to the style of workout we're using in our hypertrophy past and
present training group, which actually I did want to make a comment on that.
So, you know, everyone has been part of it.
Amazing.
Thank you so much for being part of it.
What I've actually seen some people doing, which I it's not exactly the intention of the group, but
I think it's quite smart, is people who've joined the group who are using the workout as a backbone
to their own routine.
But maybe they've got some additional equipment in their own home gym or whatever, and then they're
engaging in the conversation being like, hey, I've got this, how can I include this?
And so we can actually like fine tune that program around that person's availability, equipment
availability in their own home gym.
So if that's how you guys want to engage in the grid, by all means, you're welcome to do that.
And I can give you guys guidance on how you can modify these silver routines to fit with your own
home gym as well.
Fantastic.
And of course, you know, that larger number of exercises that are permitted by having those extra
pieces of kit is only going to be helpful.
You know, it's it's always going to be a better idea to have an extra exercise here or there than
to, you know, kind of start spamming sets or doing advanced training techniques as they used to call
them.
I mean, always going to be better to have those options.
But really, really nice program.
We actually, I believe we talked about Clancy Ross when we did one of our most listened to episodes,
which is the one where we talked about splitting out full body three times a week to upper lower 6 *
a week.
And so it's interesting that he really does come through some winning, winning ideas and winning
programs.
I think he's really want to watch out to the Silver era group.
Yeah, yeah, absolutely.
Ironically, today's topic is somewhat related to that topic in some ways.
Might hand over to you to introduce what we're going to be talking about.
Yeah, so let me let me kind of give the context because people are going to guess anyway even if I
don't give them the context.
So basically I was asked on my Instagram questions on Friday, I believe, about a current idea that
is floating around the fitness industry, which is related to training frequency.
So basically the starting point of this idea is that we shouldn't train too frequently.
We shouldn't train them also too frequently because if it's still in it's hypertrophy stimulus
period.
If it's still, you know, kind of undergoing growth at the point when we start the next workout, then
there might be some kind of interference effect.
So it's that we don't get maximum stimulus from that second workout after we've done the first
workout.
So in the context in which this was argued, it was argued basically saying if you train every kind
of 48 hours, which is what we've got here with Clancy Ross doing 3 workouts per week, if you train
every 48 hours, what you might find is that your second and third workouts of the week are obviously
going to be done 48 hours after a proceeding workout.
And the idea essentially, or the argument essentially, is that in doing so, you are still in your
hypertrophy stimulus period.
And there's then this interference effect that stops you from kind of maximizing the growth of those
sequential workouts.
Obviously, when you get to the following, if you're doing Monday, Wednesday, Friday, you get to the
following Monday, then you've got 72 hours before you start the Monday workout and then you're
resetting and starting again.
That's the context that we're talking about.
OK, so the reference that was provided for these, this argument doesn't exist.
OK, So the original reference that was provided was a Japanese researcher called Tagayaki and the
reference was Tagayaki 2022 or there is no Tagayaki 2022 paper.
But Tagayaki did actually work on this this concept.
So all we're going to do today is walk through the very cool studies that were actually done on this
idea and talk about what they mean and what what it actually what is actually going on.
What you have to be careful of though, is that Taggyaki, and also when we kind of figured out what
the actual citation was that was being referenced in the context of this argument.
You have to be aware that there are other studies which have done a similar but completely different
in terms of what's being studied.
Studies design to address a different question, which is the repeat of that effect.
So some studies, what they've done is they've done multiple workouts like Monday, Wednesday, Friday.
And just to be clear, all of this stuff is in animal models.
So if you don't like animal models, you can kind of stop listening now.
None of this is relevant, but basically in other studies what they've done is take an animal model
and test the repeat about effect by doing one workout on Monday, 48 hours later, come back on a on a
sort of Wednesday or Friday or even 72 hours.
I mean it is not really kind of that important in the context of this specific model.
What those guys are doing is actually looking for how the repeat about effect changes post workout,
anabolic signalling in predominantly M Tor pathway and also things like muscle protein synthesis.
What you tend to find in that literature, and as I say, this is actually the study that was
referenced, which is completely relevant for training frequency.
And what you actually tend to find is that anabolic signaling MPs tends to decrease try quite
dramatically as you go from workout one to two to three in a program.
And that's mainly happening because M Tor signaling and MPs, obviously all they're doing is
contributing to muscle damage repair.
And of course, repeat about effect tells you, you know, a gigantic amount of muscle damage post
first workout, much reduced after your second, third, fourth, whatever.
So generally what you find is that in these where you can call repeat about effect or sort of early
training status, this if you want to be really kind of, you know, granular about it.
What we're really looking at is how the signalling processes and the MPs, the most proteins industry
regulations decrease quite dramatically from workout one to two three.
It's got nothing to do with training frequency.
It's literally just telling you that as muscle damage decreases from workout one to two to three,
you end up with a smaller signalling response because you don't have as much damage to repair.
So this is a a really kind of complex problem because, you know, the original idea kind of suggested
that we should be looking at the Tagi Gaki studies, which are relevant because they did actually
look at frequency.
I'm going to talk about that in a minute, but also revealed the fact that you can kind of get
yourself in a bit of a pickle if you misunderstand the purpose of what some studies are doing in
this literature.
Because some of them looking repeated bad effects which got nothing to do with training frequency.
Others are comparing how different training frequencies lead to reduced signaling in certain
situations versus other situations.
So it's the context that we find ourselves in.
Is that all making sense so far?
It is.
And if someone's listening to this and they've heard you say repeated bad effect and like, hang on,
what is that?
I think we have a whole episode on that.
Do you recall?
You're looking at me like maybe we don't, maybe maybe we don't.
But in a nutshell, what you're ultimately saying there is that the first exposure to a an exercise
is going to be the highest amount of muscle damage you're going to get.
And then that's going to, there's going to be changes, fibre type shifting, etcetera, that's going
to occur and cause much less muscle damage after that first exposure.
And it's, it's largely taking place in that first week or that first exposure.
So the idea that someone's going to continue to cause less and less and less and less damage over
time, not, that's really sort of exaggerated, isn't it?
It is very much exaggerated.
It's largely an exponential process, so you get an enormous effect after workout one.
Probably 80% of the effects that you're ever going to get in your entire life are going to come
after workout one and the other 20% is going to happen mostly over workouts 2-3 and four.
The idea is you can kind of say, oh, I'm, I've trained for three years, therefore I don't get very
much muscle damage.
I'm like, well, three weeks.
It's the same, yeah.
And so when I have a new client to start a new plan or something like that, and like, oh man, I'm so
sore after week 1, often those people will think, am I really overdoing the volume?
Do I need to cut back?
And you know, often they'll be on, you know, 2 sets of muscle per workout or something like that.
And my response would be like, hey, let's give it another week.
Let's see how you're feeling after one more week.
And you know, 99.9% of the time they're fine.
So if you're listening to this and you're like, hey, that's me.
That's what's happening.
And after a week, basically, you have this protection in place.
One other comment, which is totally irrelevant to anything you said, but I just want to put this out
there so everyone is aware.
When you see people talking about studies online on Instagram or whatever, and someone gives you a
PMID, never grab that PMID and put it into ChatGPT.
I don't know if people realize this, but ChatGPT can't do that or it doesn't do that.
And then it will make up the study associated with that PMID.
And I get into arguments, discussions, let's call them discussions, probably every second or third
day when people will argue with me about the study that I posted, saying it didn't show anything you
said.
And I'll be like, did you just by chance put that into chat apt?
And they're like, yeah, I did.
OK, Well, that's the problem there.
So at this point you just simply cannot take a PMID and think AI is going to explain it to you.
OK.
Yeah, I mean always go and check the actual reference online.
I think is the is the answer to the question there.
So, so where we are then is that we have this proposal which already has, you know, kind of a number
of problems with it.
But let's address the proposal itself in a steel man kind of environment.
Rather than saying, oh, look, the original kind of idea clearly is flawed.
We can discard it because, you know, these errors were made.
OK, well, errors were made.
I mean, that's OK, that's not a problem.
Let's look at the actual idea and address it on its merits.
And the best way to do that is actually to look at the real tagging study and talk about what they
actually said.
Now, I love these studies.
I think they're incredibly informative.
I don't generally talk about them very much because you don't need to.
So let me just kind of give a very quick pre see of what's actually happening in the post workout
period.
We do a strength training workout and then two totally and utterly separate things are happening.
The first thing we need to know is that there is a hypertrophy stimulus period occurring in which
the muscle is actually or the muscle fibre is actually going to grow.
And when it reaches the end of that, then it starts obviously to atrophy.
And that's kind of the whole idea behind net hypertrophy across a week.
So basically we're trying to avoid that by doing higher frequency training, by staying in
hypertrophy stimulus periods as much as you possibly can.
The second thing that's happening is that you are going to be repairing muscle damage that you
created in the workout.
Now, the really important thing is that most of the data that we've got at the moment suggests that
hypertrophy stimulus periods are actually quite short, relatively short.
We've done a podcast episode on this before.
But the easiest way of seeing this is that if you look at the general kind of shape of the curve
after a strength training workout, what you see is that hypertrophy as kind of caused by an
elevation in muscle protein synthesis spikes really high, like 150% in the first kind of 6 to 12
hours.
And then comes flying back towards the baseline.
You know, at the end of that kind of 12 hour period.
And then kind of starts to just gradually drift down back towards true baseline over the following
kind of 24 hours, getting down to based on around about 36.
That's generally what you say after strength training work out.
If on the other hand, you look at a muscle damaging scenario like non exercise or like a very sort
of short, short, sharp eccentric contraction causes strain injury, what you'll see is that you get
basically nothing really happening for the 1st 24 hours or so and then you get a gradual increase to
increase muscle protein synthesis later on.
So you see these two totally separate responses.
One's taking a really, really short period of time immediately post workout.
That's your hypertrophy stimulus and the stimulus, the, the MPs rate elevation that's directed
towards damage repair is much slower and much later.
So what we can really see is that you've got these two totally separate processes going on now.
The more damage you create, the later that happens.
So if you kind of look at volumetric loss studies, you'll see that the delay is really, really quite
substantial.
If you look at the really crazy muscle damage studies and some Rd. models, it can be days and days
and days before you really kind of get meaningful stuff actually happening.
And essentially all that's telling us is that the more the muscle damage, more muscle damage you
create, the longer the recovery process is going to be, which obviously is kind of intuitive, but
the later the MPs rate elevation is going to be.
So really what we're expecting then is a kind of two totally separate processes, One which is kind
of short and sharp and is kind of pretty much over with within 36 hours or so.
And the other which is kind of a long drawn out process, which could be actually relatively short.
In reality, if you don't create very much of them is like you do single sets or you kind of working
with heavier loads and whatever.
And then secondly, alternatively, you kind of create more damage.
You do a whole bunch of sets, or maybe you're doing eccentric training in a platic context.
You could find yourself looking at a kind of a, you know, 3 or 4 days worth of kind of recovery
process, if not longer.
So these two totally and utterly separate kind of things that are going on.
So what we need to be clear about, and I've said this 100 times, and the Internet just looks
straight past it, or looks straight past me as if I'm talking a foreign language.
The actual hypertrophy stimulus period and the recovery process are literally completely unrelated
to each other.
There's just nothing to do with each other.
One is causing growth and the other one is causing repair to damage that you've created.
And you can have the same amount of growth and a completely different recovery process depending on
what you actually did in the workout in terms of creating muscle damage.
Is all that kind of sticking up?
Yeah, yeah.
And we have done, I think maybe 2 episodes on MPs and the time course of MPs, my favorite protein
synthesis, yeah.
Now, very quickly before I get to the kind of Taghigaki studies, when we talk about post workout
fatigue, we generally kind of have this very clear model that says you create muscle damage, the
muscle damage then produces an inflammatory response.
That inflammatory response then produces super spinal central nervous system T So you kind of got,
you know, these two very clear things.
Now, in addition, you might also have a couple of other calcium I'm related, the mechanisms that
were triggered during the workout that are similarly, you know, kind of starting with calcium and
accumulation the same way that muscle damage is.
So you might have when you kind of get to, you know, the day after the workout, if you did a bunch
of sets, you might have some excitation contraction coupling failure, you might have some cell
membrane damage.
Both of those are calcium ion triggered.
You might have some myofibrillar damage, which is the muscle damage that we talked about.
Again, that's calcium ion triggered and you've got the inflammatory response off the back of that
muscle damage, not directly calcium and triggered, but indirectly so.
And that basically gives you the full suite of what's happening now.
Just very quickly, some people have kind of got confused about central nervous system fatigue in the
post workout period because they hear me say, oh, if you do kind of high, you know, cardiovascular
demand strength training exercises like 1012 RIP Max squats, you're going to have some super span of
T because you're going to be breathing hard and that is going to produce perception of effort.
And then you're obviously going to reach a maximum tolerable perception effort earlier.
And that's going to stop you from hitting, you know, kind of your Max level of recruitment.
And that is literally the definition of CNFT.
And they say to these, they say to themselves, oh, OK, so when my kind of breathing goes back to
normal, the Super spinal CNFD is gone.
I'm like, yeah, you've got it.
You've you've nailed it.
And like, OK, so that means there's no post workout CNFD.
I'm like, OK, now you don't understand what you're talking about because the post workout fatigue,
CNS variety is created by the inflammatory response.
It's a completely separate thing from the actual cardiovascular situation.
If I do a bunch of eccentric convections, I probably aren't going to be out of breath.
I'm not going to be out of breath at all.
But I'm going to have a horrible amount of post workout CNS fatigue because I'm going to have an
inflammatory response, quite substantial one to the muscle damage I've created.
So they're totally and utterly separate things.
And I think a lot of people go well if CNS fatigue is dissipating quickly after the workout's
finished, then why do we have post workout CNST?
And like your error is assuming that they are caused by the same thing and they're not.
I mean ultimately they are both caused by sensations, but their sensations are coming from different
places.
One's coming from the cardiovascular system and the other's coming from the inflammatory process
just.
It's tricky because it is actually the same type of CNS fatigue both of the inner supers, but
they're both caused.
By the, you know, kind of perceptions of effort being experienced in a different way.
Yeah.
So that is a hard one to sort of clearly distill down.
I guess it would, it would be easier just to think about it as within session fatigue and post
workout fatigue, which absolutely we do use that language a fair bit because they're not, they're
not only are they not the same thing.
Guess they're the same type of fatigue, but they don't actually overlap.
Like post workout CNS fatigue doesn't exist at the point that you're doing that workout.
Like the damage you caused in that workout and you're going to talk more about damage I think in a
moment, but that's not going to be affecting you for hours until after that workout.
So we have two very distinct time periods of where that CNS fatigue is actually occurring.
Totally.
So essentially that's all background to, you know, essentially what I want to talk about today,
which is the three Tagaki studies that looked at training frequency.
Because as I've said, the original kind of challenge here, the original kind of hypothesis that
we're being, we're kind of analysing here is the idea that if you do 2 workouts close together and
you essentially are doing a workout inside the hypertrophy stimulus period of the previous workout,
then being inside the hypertrophy stimulus period is going to be inhibiting you from triggering a
high level of muscle, muscle protein synthesis rates after that second workout.
So that's the idea.
Now what the Tagayaki studies show is that it has absolutely nothing to do with being inside the
hypertrophy stimulus period.
The problem is actually being inside the recovery period.
And those two things does have, you know, kind of made the point a minute ago, are actually totally
separate.
Now I'm going to go through these studies slowly and carefully, but I'm just going to come back to
something I mentioned about 5 or 10 minutes ago, which is that it doesn't actually matter most of
the time.
And the reason for that is because post work appetite mechanisms are already stopping you from
triggering a high level of either motion improvement or mechanical tension.
So it doesn't really matter.
The only reason the technical studies are interesting is because they're using electrically
stimulated contractions, which bypasses a lot of post workout team mechanisms.
And so they can actually show you something that isn't really going to be a big deal physiologically
most of the time because you just won't get to that point.
You're not going to arrive at that level of kind of stimulus because you can't get there.
And the reason you can't get there is because if you have muscle damage and excitation contraction,
coupling failure and cell membrane knowledge, you are not going to be able to produce high levels of
mechanical tension in the muscle fibers that you've damaged.
It's not going to happen.
If you've got an inflammatory response producing a increase in your superspinal CST, you're not
going to be able to trigger the Motuna criminal level.
You're not going to be able to activate the muscle fibers.
You're not even going to be able to get get as far as treating any mechanical tension in those
fibers.
So ultimately most of the time in video in in real humans doing exercise, you are going to be
prevented from entering into the zone where the tagi tagi studies actually apply.
I'm not saying it never applies, maybe it probably does in very small areas and certain muscle
fibers, but most of the time you're not going to get that far.
So I think that's really, really important that the actual kind of post work appetite processes are
going to stop you from actually creating this particular situation.
But as I say, using electrically stimulated contractions in rodent models allows you to bypass a lot
of that stuff and actually create, you know, meaningful levels of tension and certainly maximum
levels of MOTU increment.
Cool.
So OK basically the the Taguigaki studies 20/17/2019 and 20/20.
What they actually started from is the observation that an oxidative stress can lead to endoplasmic
reticulum stress, which then basically produces something called the unfolded protein response,
which blocks the 1st part of the muscle protein synthesis rate elevation process called translation
initiation.
So essentially we've got a number of steps here, so I'll just go through that again.
What we're saying is that oxidative stress in any scenario.
So it could be oxidative stress in an injury scenario, it could be oxidative stress in a kind of
exogenous kind of, you know, sort of test.
I mean, it doesn't really matter.
You create oxidative stress inside the muscle fibre and a lot of the time during exercise, oxidative
stress is associated with mitochondrial activity.
In the post workout period as we'll talk about in a minute, it's large associated with the
inflammatory response.
So oxidative stress in a variety of injury scenarios has been shown, had been shown prior to 2017
when Taguigaki's research started, had been shown to basically inhibit the muscle protein synthesis
rate elevations that might be occurring until the muscle for whatever reason, maybe injury repair in
the context have been studied.
And as I say, the way that it happened was you have oxidative stress that then causes endoplasmic
reticulum stress that then produces the unfolded protein response, which is this inhibition of
translation initiation, which is the first step in the elevation of most protein synthesis.
So you've got this relatively well described kind of concept.
And So what they did was they went looking for both oxidative stress and indications of inhibited
translation initiation.
Now the really interesting thing is that if you look at the way in which muscle protein synthesis
rate elevations happen in the post workout period or in post injury period, it doesn't really matter
because just to reiterate, muscle protein synthesis rate elevations are basically stimulated by the
M Tor signaling pathway.
Similarly in muscle injury scenarios.
So this could be non exercise injury.
So you can you know, literally in an experimental scenario, you could kind of cut a little piece of
muscle away or you could, you know, kind of drop a small weight on it as they do in the contusion
studies and you could produce a small amount of damage.
You will then get an M Tor signaling response and you'll also get an MOS protein synthesis rate
elevation and identical process to if you trigger hypertroid, they they are literally the same.
So if you kind of start with M Tor, I'm not a big fan of the M Tor kind of signalling pathway
research.
I think it gets people into a mess much more quickly than actually elucidates any kind of useful
information.
But very briefly, what you're generally going to find is that you see starting points in the M Tor
signalling pathway and you tend to also then see the downstream or N or like what I call end stage
downstream kind of signalling markers like P 60s.
Hang on, let me get the terminology correct.
P I can't remember the terminology. 44 EBP 1 is the one I'm going to be talking about today and the
mistrudge the name of the other one P70S6K, sorry.
So P70S6K is the one I'm not going to be talking about today.
And four EBP 1 is going to be the one I am talking about today.
Both of those are downstream effectors of the M2 signaling pathway call.
So what we tend to find then if we look for markers at the M Tor signal pathway is operating at a
high level.
What we look for is those two markers because that tells us we've kind of gone through the entire M
Tor signaling pathway and reached a point where it's about to trigger muscle protein synthesis.
So what technically started with is saying, OK, well let's go and look and see whether we've got M
Tor signaling happening and let's see if we've also got muscle protein synthesis happening and let's
see if we've also got oxidative stress present and then let's measure that in different frequencies
of training.
So now they didn't look at like a whole range of frequencies.
They looked at 72 hours, 24 hours and 8 hours.
So not kind of frequencies that we would necessarily want them to look at, but that's what we've
got.
So they start out with these three frequencies.
And so they're looking for these various outcomes.
What they found was that as you go from 72 down to 8 hours, you gradually increase the amount of
oxidative stress that's present, which is perfectly logical if you think about the amount of kind of
damage that's being created by electrically stimulated contractions.
And we'll kind of talk a little bit more about volume dose responses in rodent models versus human
studies in a minute, but.
So you mean it's more oxidative stress present at those earlier?
Timelines, yeah.
So you start you, you do a workout after only 8 hours following the previous one, you're going to
have pretty chunky amount of oxygen to stress, whereas if you leave 72 hours, you're not going to
have very much not really hugely surprising.
And I mean that's just kind of where where you would expect it to be.
Now, what we, they did not expect to find or what they were kind of interested in is that the M Tor
are kind of downstream effectors as in like the, the, the ones I mentioned earlier, we've got these
two downstream effectors, P70S6K and we've got 4E four brain is just not processing these, these
lungings right now for EBP 1.
You get the because I, I really don't like the MTL Cigna research at all.
I spend no time reading this stuff.
I don't like it.
I think it is really, really misleading 90% of the time.
And I explain, well, you'll see why as we go through it.
These two downstream effectors are really, really kind of highly elevated and they're highly
elevated to a greater extent as you go from 72 hours through to 8 hours.
So if you kind of doing workouts quite close together, you basically end up adding on top of your
existing M Torsoli pathway because it's already elevated.
And so you add a whole load more on top of it.
But that's totally and utterly doable.
There's no problem with that.
And I think this is one of those really important points that goes against the original kind of
claim, which is that the original claim was that if you look from workout one to workout 2 to
workout 3, because obviously this was relating to a repeated bad effect scenario, you get decreasing
M total signaling.
Well, yeah, obviously, because you kind of got less damage.
And the idea was the suggestion was that if you have too close together workouts, workouts that are
too close together, you could end up decreasing the amount of M total signal.
Well, that's not what happens.
It doesn't you you actually scale it up.
It just carries on adding on top of what you've already got.
You don't like suppress M Tor signalling If you've already got some M Tor signalling still present
from a previous hypertrophy stimulus period, it just stays there.
It adds on top of what you've already got.
There's no loss of that signalling, but M muscle protein synthesis was suppressed.
Now in this first study, in the 2017 study, they weren't actually able to find evidence of the
unfolded protein response.
So they kind of sat there going, OK, well, we know that oxygen stress is high and we know that MPs
is not being elevated in these short kind of kind of eight hour sort of gaps between workouts or
less so in the 24 and the 72.
So we can see that there's something going on here where you've got suppressed levels of MPs, but
you're still at really high M Tor or clearly that is a really high.
And with the oxidated stress present, that's clearly an indication that you've probably got some
kind of interference between the oxidated stress and the MPs rate elevation because the M Tor is
high but the MPs is not.
And the oxidated stress is a clear explanation why.
But they couldn't get as far as actually showing that the unfolded protein response was actually
responsible by means of the endoplasmic reticulum stress.
So ultimately they weren't actually able to get the whole way in that very 1st 2017 study.
Is this all kind of?
There's a lot there.
I've got a couple of questions for you.
So, so OK, part of the context of this whole conversation is people often will look at the, the
frequency discussion 2 times versus 3 times or whatever per week and they'll say, well, I think 2
times is as good or better.
And there's obviously some kind of blunted effect.
And, and naturally people will go to MPs or myofibrillar protein synthesis.
And obviously we've talked about that a lot in the past and we've shown that realistically when
we're looking at the strength training exercise, there's no evidence that MPs or myofibrillar
protein synthesis is going to be elevated for more than a day or two.
And so that obviously is not the explanation as to why there might be a reduction in stimulus or in,
in yeah, I guess hypertrophy stimulus from that higher frequency training.
So then what people tend to do is say, well, there's some some other pathway, there's something else
that's being down regulated and M tours starting to become this kind of, I guess pose a child of
look, it's it's probably to do with mtor.
It's not MPs, it's MTOR.
OK.
Let me just jump in straight away that OK, so the way that this framework operates and it's it's a
bit surprising that people haven't kind of grasped this, The way this framework operates is that
MTOR signalling gets you to MPs.
Now does that mean does that mean you can't get to MPs another way?
You can get to MPs another way, but the M Tor signaling pathway is the primary one.
Can you get anywhere else from M Tor that actually adds?
No, you're laughing because you can't.
The the basic model is if you have a muscle fiber, imagine it's a tube.
You have muscle fiber and you have muscle protein synthesis rate elevations and you have muscle
protein breakdown.
If muscle protein synthesis is elevated and muscle protein breakdown doesn't change, you will add
protein to that muscle fiber.
End of discussion.
End of.
Discussion.
So MPs is we're putting proteins in the muscle fiber.
Exactly like you're building like anybody who says, Oh well, you know, MPs might not be elevated,
but if inventory is elevated, then you could be adding what?
Adding what?
Where because you're not you're.
Not putting the proteins in the muscle pad.
MPs minus MPB is the equation, end of discussion.
Anybody who disagrees with that can just leave, leave the conversation because they're wrong.
I mean it, this is the whole point.
This is why when people say to me, you know, oh, well, MPs is elevated.
Therefore I'm adding, adding muscle proteins.
And I know you're not if muscle protein breakdown is also elevated.
I've got some really cool studies showing that in certain situations, especially injury context, you
have a really big jump up in MPs.
Or if you're arguing that MPs elevations always cause the addition of protein irrespective of what
MPB is doing, then being injured is a great way to get jacked.
Which is complete nonsense because people who get injured lose muscle mass like you wouldn't
believe.
It's insanely fast, much faster than just simple atrophy from disuse.
So, and that's glucocorticoids.
So MPB has always got to be taken into consideration.
So if MPB is high because you've got muscle damage present, then you can have a big increase in MPs
and you don't get anywhere.
So MPs minus MPB is the equation for adding that protein.
That's that.
That is absolutely axiomatic.
You can't fiddle with that and go, Oh well, you know, there might be other things other than MPs.
No, in the context of MPs minus MBB, that's the end of the conversation.
And you can't add proteins any other way.
I mean, you can get to MPs.
Rate evasion is a different way from M Tor.
Totally.
That makes M Tor less interesting than MPs.
Yeah, yeah.
So to to explain this like someone's five, imagine you've got a jar and you're putting marbles in
the jar, and MPs is putting marbles in the jar and muscle protein breakdown is taking marbles out of
the jar and MTOR is handing marbles over to MPs.
Is your biggest provider of marbles.
OK, There are other providers of marbles, but mtor is your biggest provider, OK.
So basically that's that's kind of the model that will be working in that situation.
You can't, you can't have a scenario where you don't go through MPs.
You have to go through MPs to get unless you literally just stop MPB completely, then OK your
existing levels of MPs.
But that's the same thing.
I mean, it's just one it's.
Still, yeah, it's still irrelevant to M Tor as well.
So when people are saying, well, maybe it's M Tor, maybe it's something else and it's that's a
fundamental misunderstanding of how MPs and how muscle protein, yeah, it's working.
But even if it even if, if that wasn't a misunderstanding, you're saying, well, these studies
actually showing M Tor wasn't inhibited anyway.
And it's absolutely.
Not you.
You've got, you've got you.
That is not a limiting factor.
M Tor is not a limiting factor.
You can have as much of it as you want.
The problem is getting from the M Tor to the next thing.
That's the issue.
Yeah.
That's really where the the Techie Jackie studies come in.
So if one more question for you.
So obviously you've talked about oxidated stress so far in the context of what we're discussing here
is that oxidative stress at a muscle fibre level with the.
Yeah.
And so they actually induced that and I think was one of these studies where they induced that they
actually like maybe injected hydrogen peroxide or something like that to cause.
So in, in, in, in the studies that were done before the Tagachi literature kind of got started,
that's what they were doing.
They were basically introducing hydrogen peroxide into cell cultures to behave as the oxidative
stretch.
Hydrogen peroxide is something that actually is created naturally inside most fibres as regard to,
you know, after metabolic processes.
So it's not a totally unnatural thing.
But you put some nitrogen peroxide in there and just you just see what happens and it basically
produces oxidative stress, obviously, because that's what it is.
And that then will trigger endoplasmic reticulum stress in the unfolded protein response.
So you kind of can artificially exogenously kind of introduce this hydrogen peroxide oxygen stress
and just see what happens.
But the tangy activities aren't doing that.
The oxygen stress is produced in the target studies is literally just because of muscular
contractions.
So this is then all relevant at a per muscle fiber or per muscle level.
Yeah, in the same way that muscle damage and calcium I'm related to Tigar.
Yeah, great.
So what we've looked at then we looked at the first TAGGY study, which actually if they'd managed to
get as far as endoplasmic reticulum stress, they could have finished there, but they just didn't.
But fortunately for them and for us, they didn't.
And so they did 2 further studies.
The second one basically gives us two further pieces of information which are really, really useful.
Firstly, they didn't choose to repeat the exact same protocol.
They used the same risk periods between workouts.
So they used 7224 and 8 hours between workouts, but they did a training study instead of just a kind
of, you know, acute post workout study.
So instead of just doing a couple of workouts to do I think 18 workouts.
And that enabled them to show that muscle cross-sectional area behaved exactly the same way as the
muscle protein synthesis rate elevations in the acute kind of short duration study.
So they're able to show that essentially the addition of muscle protein did exactly what we would
expect it to do based on the muscle protein synthesis rate of evasion as we study.
In other words, 72 hours between workouts gave great results, 24 not so much and eight hours not
very much at all.
So basically kind of just confirm what we're expecting to see.
The other bit which is really important about the second study 20/19 is that they measured
inflammatory response and that basically did the same thing as the oxidative stress.
Now that is it.
This is so important and this is one of those things that I think will go straight over most
people's heads if they don't actually have a prior understanding of the relationship between post
workout inflammatory responses and oxidative stress.
If you look at the graphs of in single studies and I'm not talking about comparing multiple studies,
one in which you've got inflammatory process and another one you've got oxygen.
I'm actually talking about looking at individual studies which are both at the same time.
We will notice is that the graph of post work inflammatory sponsors and there are multiple different
inflammation kind of levels.
But the two most common ones that people look at the big two 2 if you like the neutrophil response
immediately post workout and the leukocyte response kind of maybe a day after the workout.
So those are the two big spikes.
So you can kind of see a spike of neutrophils immediately post workout, a spike of leukocytes
probably the day afterwards.
Really, really important.
Neutrophils are signalling for the leukocytes, leukocytes coming in and basically kind of consuming
stuff that the Moss fibre treats as as damage or to try to essentially inside the fibre.
Now if you look at those exact 2 spikes of inflammatory responses, what you'll find is you get an
equal sized, exactly the same shape spike of oxidator stress both times.
And in fact, in the case of the leukocytes, you actually have xanthine oxidase, which is basically
oxidase stress, a really clearly sort of defined for oxide stress tracking leukocyte responses
pretty much perfectly.
And we have mechanistic data showing that it's coming from the leukocytes.
And the same thing is happening with the neutral.
So neutral and leukocytes are two inflammatory response parts of the inflammatory response if you
like.
And there's a lot more to it than just that.
But those are the kind of the big elements we tend to focus on and they are producing oxidated
stress in the post workout period.
So what this is showing us, this second study, if you put this in the context of what we already
know about what's happening post workout period, is that given that we now can see that the
inflammatory response is similarly creating a problem or is associated with the reduced hypertrophy
that happens with short periods of time between workouts.
We can see that the inflammatory response is doing that through the oxidative stress, which is
almost certainly then doing it through the endoplasmic reticulum stress and the unfolded protein
response.
Is that making sense?
So the oxidative stress response, does it differ in that, so you get that initial neutrophil
response within a few hours of that work out, Is there more oxidative stress that's occurring at
that point or at the that second damage inflammatory response similar?
I mean, ultimately the neutrophils are kind of governing the size of the leukocyte response because
that's what they are.
They're signalling molecules, so or inflammatory agents.
So they're kind.
You're always going to have a pretty close relationship between those things.
Yeah, cool.
So what we then see is the final study in the Taguaki series, Tagukaki 2020.
Now this is the bit basically where it goes all the way through to the end, which is what we wanted
to get to in the first study but didn't quite get there.
And they basically repeated the first study.
They did another acute study, another just couple of workouts.
They looked at most proteins and says emptors signalling P70S6 Ki can remember the number.
Now for EBP one.
Now basically again, as I say, we're focusing on the second of the two, not P70S6K.
We're actually focusing on for EBP one.
Basically what happens is that when 4 EBP 1 is actually activated in the M Tor signalling pathway,
what it does is it disassociates from other things which then allow complexes to be produced which
cause translation initiation to happen.
So remember all the time what we're trying to do is say we're finishing the mtor signalling pathway
with these two kind of strangely named kind of downstream effectors, P70S6K and four EBP one.
What we want to do now is get from there to translation initiation.
And one of the important things that's actually created is a complex between EIF 4E and EIF 4 GI
think those are the correct terminologies.
I mean they'll be close enough.
Those two things together form a complex that allows you to create translation initiation.
If you stop that from happening, then you, even though you've got as far as 4 EBP 1, you won't get
through to the end of the process that allows translation initiation and most processes.
And this is to happen.
And that is basically what the researchers found is that in this final study where they're trying to
say, well, OK, how is muscle protein images being blocked by oxidative stress?
They showed that it's happening at this particular location for EB1 basically doesn't get the next
step along in order for it to be able to create translation initiation.
It's happening with these EIF 4E and EIF 4G kind of connecting to each other and forming a complex
if you can't let that happen.
And that's basically what the unfolded protein response is probably blocking.
So this final study basically gets us a lot closer to recognising that yes, it probably is.
It probably is oxidative stress from the inflammation which we talked about a moment ago.
So the inflammation happens, causes oxidative stress that then produces the unfolded protein
response from the endoplasmic reticulum stress that's caused by the oxidative stress, and that then
stops branch translation initiation, which stops muscle protein synthesis rates from elevating.
What this is telling us then is that if your workout has produced some damage and that oxidative
stress is then present because of the inflammation caused by the damage, then you shouldn't be doing
a subsequent workout.
Now, like I said 20 minutes ago, if you've got muscle, if you've got muscle damage present and
inflammatory response present, you will have a redu reduction in tension and a reduction in motor
equipment.
You might as well not bother anyway.
But.
This is, this is interesting because this actually means this would affect.
So normally if you had muscle damage present anyway, you're going to not be recruiting motor units
at the top end of the the motor unit pool, right?
And so there'll be some muscle fibres that simply won't be getting a stimulus.
It would be normally, but actually even the muscle fibres that are going to be activated, there's
still going to be a reduction in stimulus for those fibres that are activated because of this.
So this is a double whammy.
It it basically is.
One of the things I I often mention or used to mention when I was doing a mentorship course is that
Physiology often has redundancy built into to multiple layers and this is a great example of that.
Multiple points are stopping you from getting what you know you want to get but the body doesn't
want you to do so.
Essentially voting recruitment suppression by the inflammatory response is stopping you activating
the fibre in the 1st place.
If you actually did activate it you wouldn't be able to create a mechanical tension because you
haven't got the.
The muscle damage is stopping you from actually having enough protein micro fibrils to do that.
And you've also got issues with calcium.
I'm related to excitation, contraction, coupling failure and cell number damage.
So there's multiple things stopping you from actually triggering another response if you've got
damage present.
This is just basically saying even if you somehow managed to get to the point where you can create
tension in those fibres, you're not going to be able to create an innovation in Musspritance.
And this is anyway because the opposite of stress from the inflammatory response is going to create
endoplasmic reticulum stress and stop you actually getting as far as translation initiation and
elevations in Musspritance synthesis.
It's just going to block you.
You're going to get blocked precisely at the point where you've got as far As for EBP 1, and then
you can't get any further because you know, you can't make those complexes that for EBP one would
normally make where you know, as a result of eif hate these numbers, eif 4E binding with eif 4G, you
can't do that.
It blocks you.
So you're a kid playing with the jar, putting the marbles in entours, gone to the shops, has bought
more marbles, has come back, it's walking after the kid to give them the marbles, and then oxidative
stress comes and stands in the way.
Can't, can't add any more.
So it is really, really important what this is telling us.
Then if you want to kind of jump back and go, why is this important?
What it's telling you is that this has absolutely zero to do with a hypertrophy stimulus period.
It's just, it's not about hypertrophy stimulus periods.
That's not what this literature is about.
What it's about is telling us that if you are actually trying to create hypertrophy stimulus, you
cannot be doing that in a fatigue state.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
I mean, it's, it's just telling you about muscle damage and oxidative stress.
Exactly.
And that's really, really important because all the time, this entire time that I've been teaching
this model, I've been saying don't do strength training workouts in fatigue states.
You know, don't do another workout if you if you've got muscle damage carried over from previous
one.
You know, that's why we talk about three sets to failure, 48 hours, five sets to failure, you know,
kind of 72 hours.
The really interesting thing is these studies which show that 72 hours is kind of about the right
number for these rodents doing these workouts.
It's actually five sets of 10.
It's actually five sets of 10 isometric injections.
So it's pretty much there or thereabouts what you would expect it to be if 72 hours was the right
number of colour, right period of time to wait between workouts.
Now, interestingly, if you look at why they chose five sets of 10 isometric, electrically stimulated
isometric injections, the reason they did that is because way back before they even started this set
of studies, they did a dose response study.
Tagujeki was not the lead author on that, it was one of his colleagues.
But if you look at that study, it shows that they did 135, I think maybe 10-15 and 20 and something
around that.
They definitely did all the way up to 20 sets of these isometric contractions.
And they showed that the plateau of muscle protein symesis happens at five sets.
So in other words, this protocol is a maximum stimulus for hypertrophy in these in these rodents.
In other words, it probably corresponds to something around about 6 to 8 sets in humans of voluntary
contractions.
You know, it's definitely not 2345 sets kind of higher than that.
I meant to say it's definitely not two or three sets.
It's, I mean, it might be 5 sets in humans.
I think it's more likely to be 6:00 to 8:00, but that kind of ballpark.
So what we're saying then if you do a really big chunky workout, 6 to 8 sets, probably equivalent to
what we're talking about here in the rodent context, then you probably need to leave at least 72
hours before you do another workout.
Well, yeah.
I mean, yeah, that's what we've been saying the whole time.
Is it because when I purchased stimulus?
No, it's got nothing to do with that, Absolutely nothing to do with that at all.
Because that's the argument, yeah.
People will say, well, you're doing multiple sets, so you're getting this longer hypertrophy
stimulus, so you need a.
There's no evidence that's true.
A, there's absolutely zero evidence that that's true, and B, when you actually look at the studies
that have directly investigated this question, and three Tagaki studies are literally the best
investigation into that, what you'll find is it's absolutely all pointing towards octative stress as
a result of inflammatory responses post workout, which has got nothing to do with hypertrophy at
all.
It's pure damage repair.
Ironically, the advocates for lower frequency because of something like this would often also be
advocates for not repeating the same workout.
And yet not repeating the same workout would actually offer you some protection against this
occurring because this is at a muscle fiber level, right?
Like, yeah, so those two beliefs can't coincide.
You can't believe that this stuff is not, it's not muscle fibre specific.
And yet then believe that this is the the limiting factor to someone's ability to simulate
hypertrophy.
Like it's, this is all muscle fibre specific.
So in some ways, if you if you were doing your ABC programming and you were doing different
exercises.
This would.
Be a frequency?
Yeah, you could.
You wouldn't even be caring about this conversation because the frequency thing is irrelevant.
So yeah, I mean, hypertrophy is muscle fibre specific and muscle damage is muscle fibre specific.
The only thing that's not is the when the inflammatory response gets out into the bloodstream,
circulates and the brain picks it up, that's a global superspinal CNSC effect.
So that's the only thing that's not fibre specific in this whole kind of conversation.
And Tagi Geki just circumvents that by using electrically stimulated contractions.
OK, So one question and I don't know if you want to get into this, but I'm more people, what makes
one more susceptible to this oxidative stress scenario?
Are there things, I mean, I guess you said, hey, the muscle damage is the the number one thing.
So obviously training in a way that's going to mitigate.
Muscle, yeah, I mean just work through the process.
I mean, basically if the inflammatory response is responsible for creating the oxidative stress in
this particular context, which it is, then the amount of muscle damage will determine the amount of
inflammatory response.
And the amount of muscle damage is going to be determined by a, your fibre type proportion and B,
your voluntary activation levels.
So if you're a high voluntary activation kind of person with high fast twitch fibre proportion, then
yeah, you're going to be struggling with this.
Conversely, if you're a slow twitch person with low voluntary activation levels and you're probably
not going to notice it at all.
But again, as I say, I don't think most people get this far most of the time.
I don't think that the the motor equipment deficit caused by super span of tea will let you do this
most of the time.
And even if you can get some fibres here and there, because you're switching exercises, you know,
then you know, the chances are that muscle damage will stop you from creating the tension.
So ultimately this all comes back to recovery conversation and and what can you recover from or
what's going to influence post workout recovery And obviously the amount of.
Time thing is a recovery issue, yeah.
Yeah.
And but there would be some populations that'll be a little bit more susceptible to this, right?
So if people are like highly stressed out, not sleeping chronically or older populations like that
could influence some of this, couldn't it?
Totally.
And in fact, that's where you then start to get the older people kind of or the older people the
order, the order sort of rodent literature as well.
You tend to get those studies giving you the same answers where you tend to find that for a given
workout volume, older people will do better with two times a week versus three times a week.
And this is one of those kind of basic math kind of things where I I get a little bit aggravated
with people.
I tend to post my meme of kind of looking a little bit dis dis disgruntled, but the standard kind of
response to when I say that is people go, well, OK, so if I'm older and I want to train less
frequent, well, the same rules still apply.
So if you train less frequently, then now you've got an atrophy effect that's bigger than than you
would have if you treat more frequently.
The better is to get your volume all the way down to minimum levels for the single workout and just
carry on training three times a week.
Instead of continuing with your same volumes, just kind of dial back the volume for the workout and
then keep the frequency the same.
Totally valid.
I think this is one of those really important kind of things that I'm going to emphasize this, Rob
and I are going to talk about void dose responses on the on the High Performance Physiology podcast
in relation to other reductions soon, I think.
But one of the fundamental observations that we get with dose responses is that they're non linear.
And I keep saying this and people just keep ignoring it.
Volume distances are non linear.
So if you do a second set or a third set or a fourth set or fifth set, the stimulus you get from
those second, third, fourth, fifth sets is progressively smaller and smaller and smaller compared to
the first set.
You're basically tailing off.
You're getting less and less and less extra value for everything you do.
That's not true.
If you do workouts, if you do sets on different days, if I do a set on Monday, Wednesday and Friday,
I get maximum value from each of those first sets.
If I do three sets on one day, I don't, I get progressively smaller and smaller stimulus from those
sequential sets.
And I think people kind of hear that and it goes in one ear and straight out the other ear.
And like, no, look at it mathematically.
That is telling you that by definition you want to do the fire frequency and you want to do smaller
workout volumes.
You don't want to be smashing everything into a single workout and then waiting a week to recover
because that a isn't going to work from a dose response point of view and it's not going to work
from an atrophy point of view either.
And of course, we're creating a lot more damage in that single workout and that's going to create
CNS fatigue for other stuff that's going to get in the way.
So.
Ultimately, we're saying you just want to train you, you want to train as as soon as that stimulus
period is over, once you're in a recovered state.
And so you don't want the recovery to be the thing that's limiting how often you're training.
So if you can recover from three sets and you can train again when that stimulus period is over,
which is let's say 2 days, let's just settle on that for now.
Then you you could do up to three sets.
If you can only recover from 2 sets, then it's not worth doing three sets and and giving it an extra
day.
Then you would do 2 sets.
That's ultimately what we're getting at, isn't it?
Yeah.
I mean, and just to underpin what you said there about let's say 48 hours, ultimately, you know, the
standard way of measuring stimulus periods, proxy measurement is the MPs rate elevation.
Now I don't like that because I think that if you create muscle damage, you could have quite a long
MPs rate elevation.
I think if you, if, if we eventually get MPs rate elevations after eccentric exercise, I think
they're going to be quite high for several days, but there's going to be nothing to do with
hypertrophy stimulus period.
It's going to be pure muscle damage repair processes.
So again, you know, people who are saying, oh, MPs is elevated, therefore, you know, hypertrophy is
happening.
Like, no, it's not.
I can show you studies in muscle injuries which have got nothing to do with hypertrophy where MPs is
elevated and MPV is elevated even more.
So you end up in a net protein loss situation despite the MPs is elevated.
I, I really despair of people who are saying, oh MPs is elevated, therefore hypertrophy is
happening.
Like you just haven't read outside of a tiny number.
Maybe you have not read any studies, but they've not clearly not read outside of the immediate
hypertrophy literature.
So you just literally look at muscle injuries and see elevated elevations and MPs that are gigantic
and MPs is even bigger.
Sorry, MPB is even bigger than MPs.
So you end up with a net loss.
But you know, if we just kind of look at MPs and say that's our proxy for a hypertrophy stimulus
period duration, there isn't any data that goes past about kind of know 36 hours, 42 hours,
something like that.
If we look at MPs and I get Myops, it's even less so.
And people say, Oh no, no, no, you've got studies showing that Myops is elevated for days and like,
no, you haven't.
You've got like a aerobic exercise study that shows my OPS rates, elevators associated to be damaged
for like 72 hours.
Yeah, sure, not a problem.
That's exactly what I would predict.
It's exactly what all the muscle injury data would predict.
But you haven't got any strength training workouts showing my OPS or MPs rate elevations past maybe
42 hours or so tops.
Most of it is a lot less than that 2124 hours.
So I think just to just reinforce what you're saying there about let's call it 48 hours, that's
totally valid position.
Anybody saying that my OPS and MPs are elevated for longer than 48 hours is making it up.
There's no data on that at all.
Literally 0 is that one kind of aerobic exercise study at 72 hours.
That's a damage study.
That's not our strength training study.
Oh, as I say, the muscle injury stuff goes on for days and days and days.
It's like, again, nothing to do with hypertrophy.
So the antioxidant anti-inflammatory question, so often I see people now asking questions like,
well, does that mean I can't have antioxidants near the workout?
Maybe I shouldn't have orange juice or something like that.
Because there's this connection with oxidative stress and inflammation and you need information for
these processes to occur and for muscle damage repair and hypertrophy and all of this.
And that's a really messy.
It's a scenario because those two things are linked and one of them is needed and one of them is not
as much needed.
Hey.
Yeah.
So I mean my OK, so reiterating what I said earlier, the inflammatory response and the post workout
oxidative stress responses are intrinsically linked.
So it's not surprising that if you test the effects of exogenous antioxidant and exogenous
anti-inflammatory, you'll get very similar results because basically you're you're kind of driving
at the same thing in in those in those situations, I think that we probably need those processes in
order to bring about the entire muscle damage and muscle damage repair processes, bring them to a
fulfilment.
I think that if you try and blunt that and get rid of it, you are running the risk of leaving muscle
fibres in 1/2 repaired state.
And I think that is probably what underpins the issue with the hypertrophy sort of findings.
So if you look at anti inflammatories in hypertrophy context, you tend to see a bit of a blunting
effect.
I think that's probably the fact that you're basically trying to grow fibres that are not fully
repaired.
That's my starting point.
I don't really agree with people who say, oh, this clearly shows that, you know, inflammation is
involved in hypertrophy.
No, that's, that's nonsense.
It's absolute nonsense that you'd have to literally just take your brain out and put it on the table
next to you to believe that.
It's just so stupid.
You know, inflammation is not causing hypertrophy.
It's not, you know, that's people trying to keep the muscle damage hypothesis alive.
It's not, it's not valid.
But if you don't repair the fibres properly then sure, maybe they won't grow properly in the future.
I mean, that's that's probably what's happening.
If that were to say, let's say you use some form of exogenous antioxidant, anti-inflammatory,
whatever.
So I guess why I'm asking is this studies where they will look at say stuff like tart cherry as an
example or fish oil or whatever and there's reduction in oxidative stress, but then there's also.
Yeah, sure.
So basically, this is the secondary muscle damage effect.
So the thing that I think a lot of that trips a lot of people up is that it's really, really
difficult to see where the damage process ends and the repair process starts.
So essentially if you finish a workout and you have created some calcium and accumulation and so the
Moss virus, that calcium and accumulation then triggers the production of calpanes.
Calpanes are enzymes that digest proteins.
So immediately post workout and even within the workout you've got the calpain starting to attack
the myofibrils and that process takes about kind of 24 hours or so, maybe a bit less.
Now as you sort of finish that process, you get inflammation started to do the same thing.
And the leukocytes are the really important part.
They basically come in and they just consume any of that damaged area that the calpaines have been
attacking.
So imagine you've kind of got calpaines coming in and just nibbling away at stuff and then the
leukocytes come in and go that's been nibbled away out.
Let's get rid of that.
And so you basically have this two kind of stage process.
Now as you as you're going through that, you're actually saying, well, OK, so the damage is actually
happening post workout.
And I'm like, yeah, it's not tearing sort of fibres inside the workout like the kind of hypertroy
researchers that keep telling you that's nonsense.
Fatigue physiologists are telling you that damage happens post workout.
It's scalp pains attacking myofibrils, it creates the damage.
But when you then kind of describe what leukocytes are doing, you say, OK, what, what are these
macrophages actually doing?
And you say, well, they're kind of getting rid of the damaged areas.
And you say, OK, is that repair like, well, technically it is necessary as a repair process.
So if you stop it happening, then you end up with partly damaged kind of fibres sitting around doing
not very effective muscular congestions.
But you actually lose my fibula proteins when you do that.
By losing myofibular proteins, you actually lose muscle fibre force production.
So you create a fatigue effect by reducing the amount of active myosin cross bridges you're capable
of sort of forming.
So you get what's called a secondary muscle damage effect.
And that basically means that you are losing strength capacity by taking away secondary muscle
damage effect.
Like many phrases in Physiology, it's not the best terminology in the world.
You know, like progressive overload is a horrible terminology.
Secondary muscle damage effect is not good terminology.
It should be called the secondary fatigue effect because that's what it is.
You get a reduction in strength immediately post workout, you get a slight recovery, and then you
get another drop in strength because you're pulling myofibrils out of the actual survivors.
You're not, it's not really a secondary muscle damage effect.
It's actually the primary muscle damage effect, but it's actually also a repair process because
you're getting rid of stuff that was damaged.
So it's like the entire post workout period is both damage and like it just segues into a repair
process without you really being able to go where does the repair process start and where does the
damage process end?
I'm like, well, they don't.
They, they're kind of 1 and the same thing, you know, because you are creating this fatigue effect,
which is this secondary muscle damage effect, which as I say, should be called a secondary fatigue
effect.
Yeah, it gets gets messy.
I don't know if you've looked at any of the research and for resolving mediators there's because
obviously we could look at blunting or blocking or stopping that inflammatory cascade and obviously
you can look at antioxidants.
And then I guess another way of looking at it would be, well, are there things that can help
condense that down and speed that process up?
Well, OK, so this is one of the interesting things because if you look at cold water immersion, then
what you find is it it does the opposite.
It slows it down and spreads it out and I think that's probably what you're going to do.
If you do any kind of anti-inflammatory process, I think you'll slow it down and spread it out.
So I mean ultimately that's kind of what glucocorticoids do as well.
They suppress and and lengthen the post workout repair processes.
So my inclination is to say, I think really all you're doing is kind of squashing the secondary
muscle damage effect, which is making you.
So again, when we say the word recovery, we're always talking about strength recovery.
But the average fitness industry participant goes recovery, I'm, if I'm recovered, I'm recovered,
you know, I'm better.
I know we're talking about strength recovery.
So if I squash the secondary muscle damage effect, your strength recovery will be faster.
But what I've done in order to achieve that is I've squashed and spread out your inflammatory
process over a longer period of time.
So the processes of recovery are now going to take you longer to complete and maybe not actually
fully get completed.
So if you're using the word recovery in that resonant kind of sense that like I'm recovered, I'm bet
I'm like, it's all happened and finished and over with, then you're using it wrong.
Because when we say recovery, we're talking about strength recovery and fatigue is always being
measured objectively by a reduction in exercise performance.
So if I'd recovered in technical terms, I'm talking about getting my strength back to baseline
levels.
But if I'd done that by fiddling around with what's actually happening, Physiology, so it
physiologically, so it now takes longer to come to a complete conclusion or I'm delaying it and
pushing it out into future, then that resonant sense of recovered better finished isn't is not
happening.
It's different.
The problem is people use terms often emotionally well, often the word recovery has a huge emotional
component.
So I'm, I'm finished, I've got through the process out the other side.
Now you've talked about strength recovery.
That's what we're talking about always.
That's what we measure as.
So I think this is one of those really important things where what people feel in a word is not
reflected by what the word actually means in this particular context.
Yeah, yeah.
So potentially something like crows of your medias or even this compound similar to that of fish oil
could be interesting if they are not suppressing that effect but actually condensing and and
allowing it to occur at a faster.
Rate But also you've got to be aware that some of this stuff like I've been posting a few bits and
pieces about creatine because, you know, I'm not particularly interested in supplements, but it
aggravates.
Most people say that creatine creates hypertrophy, which is nonsense.
But it's also interesting when you look at the post workout fatigue effects of creatine, it does
seem to accelerate that and it's probably an antioxidant effect.
But is it is it actually working on other stuff as well?
Because if it works on the anti-inflammatory level then is it changing the CNS fatigue effects?
So you could actually see completely different locations of effect depending on what the substance
is doing.
It could be doing multiple things.
Is it just simply suppressing the presumption of effort associated with the fatigue?
Because if it's doing that, then basically it's just giving you access to muscle fibers that you
wouldn't normally have had access to.
Is that OK?
And this is really, really important.
If that is happening and you're doing a a upper lower split type situation, that's really really
useful.
Yeah, because you're walking into that workout with CNS fatigue presence anyway.
So downs if you and if and if you're using the creatine to get rid of that, then there's no
downsides of that because you're not training muscle virus that shouldn't be trained.
But if you're using it in the context of a formally situation where you're coming back to the next
workout and you've been doing four or five sets and you keep trying to do four or five sets and
you're not recovering and you're using a, an agent that's suppressing superspinal CFT, then
basically you're just hammering the same damage muscle.
You're just now going to start accumulating fatigue locally and that isn't going to be a good idea
long term.
So I think it's really, really interesting because people be like, why are you talking about
creating this context?
Why?
Why would you want to like, well, look at it specifically about what it's actually doing.
If it is creating an effect on the Super spinal level, then that's one issue.
If it's creating it on the local level, that's a totally different issue.
So that's where the research one, I think need to go.
Yeah, in in that context, it would almost be like a motivational thing, like the effect of what it's
what it's doing would be similar to motivation.
Well, yeah, I mean motivation and and, and and kind of perceptions of effort are kind of just too 2
ends of the same.
I mean, they are different in the psychobiological model of fatigue, but they operate in the same
space.
So you've got, you know, motivation going up or increase the amount of, of tolerable effort that you
can obtain.
But having sensations in there from other stuff depletes that.
So yeah, I mean, it's, it's kind of just two ends of the same kind of space if you like.
You mentioned white blood cells are leukocytes before and something that I've speculated for a
while.
I don't imagine there's any literature on this and you probably don't have any opinions on it would
be my guess.
But when you look at people who have say more like gut related issues, digestive issues, a lot of
the time what you do see is a significant suppression of leukocytes.
And I've speculated that I wanted these people might be more susceptible to a drawn out, a slower
recovery process or repair process because of that reduction in neutrophils and in white blood
cells.
And that was actually years ago when we first started talking.
That was what led me down the path of full body lower volume with my clients because my clients were
very much that type of avatar where they had these data issues.
And then I realized, hang on, this is actually just really this is best for everybody.
And you know, you don't actually need to train differently, even if you might be more susceptible to
a drawn out recovery period because of whatever issues are going on.
Do you have any, any thoughts on that?
If someone did have naturally, not naturally lower but for whatever reason, lower leukocytes, would
that affect this?
Well, I mean, ultimately stress as it's correctly defined, psychological stress as it's correctly
defined does suppress the immune system and the immune system is, as we've just been talking about,
involved in the post workout recovery process.
We do know that higher stress does lead to slower recovery.
I'm not convinced it's purely because of the glucocorticoid effect.
I think it probably also relates to the immune system.
I mean, I think you've got a perfectly valid line of reasoning there.
You're right to say I'm not.
I haven't really looked at it very closely.
I kind of just stopped with stress.
But you know, if you treat kind of serious gut issues as a stressor, which maybe they are, then you
know, you could quite easily make the argument that that is basically the same thing.
Well, incidentally, the other population you see this with is athletes.
So almost all of my athletes and especially combat athletes, people who are doing very high volumes
of work, you see significant suppression in my blood cells.
And you know, you've obviously talked about for other reasons why athletes might consider doing 2 *
a week, but it could potentially be another reason as to why 2 * a week would be more suitable to
these athletes.
Yeah, Volume just doesn't scale the way that they think it does in those contexts.
I mean, I think block periodization ideas have done a lot to damage this, where people think, oh, I
can just do all of the work I want to do on this particular quality and that it would normally take
me 3 to 6 months to develop this quality, I'm going to try and cram it all into four weeks.
And that's what block periodization tries to do.
And it's absolute nonsense because dose responses don't scale like that.
You can't create the same beneficial effect from doing something three times a week as the first
thing that you do in a workout and expect to scale that and do it all in one workout.
It doesn't work.
Even just from a conditioning aspect as well, like with people are doing very high volumes of
endurance work that's like that will often lead to significant suppression in immune.
Cells.
It's not actually the volume, it's how you get there.
So if you take a like, for example, if you take a endurance cyclist and you spend 3 or 4 years
getting them to a point where they can cycle 5 hours a day every single day, they're going to be
fine doing that.
They'll be absolutely fine doing that.
The issue is if you try and throw someone from basically not being able to do more than a couple of
hours on a bike at a time and try and get them to five hours a day in the space of like, you know,
kind of three months, it's not going to happen.
I think that's the issue that we've got and.
It's more specific as well because you think about body bullies.
I mean like a compre.
Even if someone is experienced at Comprep, there's still a lot that their body is going through, you
know, through the dieting phase, through the, the conditioning part of that.
I mean, you know, look at look at hormonal levels, like immune markers in people, calorie.
Affection is a totally different animal.
It is a definitive stressor.
When you get below a certain deficit or probably for a certain length of time and, and, and, and
probably when you get below certain levels of body failure, it will probably also behave as a
stressor.
I don't know, but you know, the way the way people tend to feel in those scenarios tends to indicate
to me that it is.
I mean, ultimately stress is how you feel.
If if you are stressed by something, you will know about it.
If you're not stressed about it, then you're not stressed about it.
This is one of those things like it's like perception of effort.
It's like, is it a high perception of effort or is it not?
Is it a stressor or is it not?
You know, I keep saying to people that they shouldn't.
I mean, like, I literally like get aggravated when I see exercise physiologists even today popping
up on, you know, social media saying, oh, exercise is a, you know, is a stressor.
And I'm like, no, it's not, It's not, it's not, it's it's that is not fitting the definition of a
stressor.
But you know, how you feel about something is what's important.
So, you know, if, if you're feeling really horrible about something, then it's stressful.
I mean, I can remember situations when I've put myself into exercise situations when it has been a
stressor.
But I have a particular type of personality that kind of, you know, encourages that sort of thing.
But most of the time it's not.
It's it's absolutely not.
Is there?
This is a rabbit hole as well, I know, but is there anything around hate and hate having so effect
on any of this?
So this is probably something we want to kind of have a conversation about another time, but you can
you can see post workout heat application and it and it's interesting to look at.
I don't want to make a definitive statement on that today.
B.
Where you can also find is that environmental temperatures have relatively interesting effects on
stress in animals, so you can relatively easily create a psychological stress effect by changing
temperature.
I just want to, I don't want to spend loads of time on this because this is absolutely something
that deserves its own podcast released.
More space and time is running out for me at the moment.
I've got to dash.
But if you look at, if you just look at the animal studies, what you'll find is that the, the, the
ambient temperature does have a very clear effect on glucocorticoid levels and subsequently on MPs
and MPB levels.
And what you'll find is that they generally tend to have a very tight band of a pleasant temperature
where glucocorticoids are minimal.
MPs is therefore highest, MPB is lowest and you get the maximum growth rate.
And they do these studies in chickens.
They do these studies in chickens because they want to know how fast can you grow a chicken.
And obviously that had a massive effect on how quickly you can sell said chicken at a certain size
in the marketplace and make your money.
So there's actually a huge amount of data gathered around how fast can you grow a chicken.
And basically it comes down to ambient temperatures being very tightly regulated.
So the chicken is maximally comfortable and minimally stressed as a result of the ambient
temperature.
Obviously, other stuff can also stress the chicken.
You want to try and avoid that.
Anyway, what I want to just kind of say about this is that is the stressor the temperature, or is
the stressor the animal's response to not being able to adjust its own activities to account for the
stressor?
So if you imagine if you get cold, you can simply move to another room.
You can put a coat on, you can turn the heating up, you can if you get too hot, you can.
It's probably a little bit of a hot potato right now.
You know, you can open a window, maybe put the air con on, if you're allowed to do that.
I don't know.
There's various things that you can do.
A chicken can't.
OK.
And this is the really, really important thing.
So is the stressor, the fact that the animal can't adjust its environment because it's in a closed
environment.
You know, it's sort of unable to escape the parameters that you're imposing on it is the stress or
the lack of agency that that animal has to adjust its own behaviours.
It can't move around to get warm or it can't expose itself to fresh air.
It can't kind of move to a warmer or colder environment.
Is the stress or the fact that you are restricting the animals natural responses, trying to adjust
its behaviour in response to the ambient temperature or is it the actual ambient temperature itself?
I think that's a really, really important question because if you look at humans generally speaking,
if it's not the actual thing itself, it's whether or not the actual human has the ability to adjust
it's scenario to get rid of the problem.
So I think stressors are about being unable to fix the problem that's in front of you really.
And that's why I say to people, exercise is not a stressor.
It's only a stressor if you're actually unable to avoid it.
And, you know, to a certain extent it has this uncontrollable, maybe even unpredictable nature to
it.
Well, if that's the case, you know, then it's not really an exercise bound that you've planned to
do.
I think that there might be, I need to go back and check.
I think there's a study in military personnel doing like a, you know, military hike or whatever in
high temperatures and, and looking at that.
But that would be the same situation as the chicken, isn't it?
I'm trying to get there.
It's like if you have no control over the scenario, I mean, and, and interestingly, if you read like
first person accounts of, of military kind of kind of training type, you know, endurance type
training exercises.
David Goggins is an amazing example.
Read those first person accounts and read how he has the psychological shifts that he's able to
engender not just in himself, but in other people he's working with to cause them to suddenly
experience the event in a completely different way.
And it ceases to be a stressor.
And this is what I keep getting at is the actual thing the stressor, because people have got heat as
a stressor.
I'm like, is it, is it, or is it the brain's processing of that thing that causes it to be
stressful?
I think a lot of people want to rush to their being like a, a physiological effect that precedes the
psychological effect.
I'm not I'm not convinced that's true.
I think 90% of the time a stressor is actually going to be psychological, not physiological.
It will be physiological once it's come through the psychological processing point, obviously.
But what I'm saying is the, the, the, the stress is recognised psychologically and that creates
physiological effects.
A lot of people want to go no, no, no, no.
The actual physiological thing, the exercise, the temperature, the, the, the whatever it is, that's
the stress.
Ben, I'm like, is it?
I'm not sure it is most of the time.
I mean, sure, I think you can create stress effects if you kind of have, have, but I think it's
probably more extreme.
Thanks.
If you look at the the the chicken studies, you'll find that the very small changes in temperature
have quite meaningful effects on muscle protein in this muscle protein brain.
And like is that really happening purely pre psychological kind of processing?
Or is it, you know, is it genuinely happening at a cellular level before you even get anywhere close
to the brain?
Or is it actually going through the brain 1st and being perceived as a problem because the chicken
can't adjust its behaviours to kind of avoid this discomfort and then that's then creating the
psychological cascade that then goes down into physiological place?
I think most of what we talk about is probably process psychologically first before it becomes
physiological, because ultimately that is what stress is.
I mean, stress is a psychological phenomenon.
What we tend to do is forget that and try and talk about it as a physiological phenomenon that has
no psychological input.
And that's not true.
And it is actually relevant to hypertrophy training.
I mean, you've mentioned there around muscle protein breakdown like this is this is stuff that
actually can matter, it can actually affect.
You gave of bodybuilding competition preparation is probably the critical kind of I mean, I think
you could if you were if you were sort of well read in the psychological kind of area and you wanted
to, you know, kind of write something up about that and do some work on that.
I think it'd be fantastic to study how you can change your way that you process, not process the way
that you.
I don't, this is my area, so I don't know how to express it correctly.
But you know, just the, the, the way that you are, the the narrative that you're constructing about
what you're going through, I think is a really interesting kind of area.
And I think that if bodybuilders are able to construct a positive narrative of what they're going
through and experience that in a way that is meaningful to them in a positive way, rather than
suffering through it, I think they probably would display more positive results at the physiological
level.
You know, because when you get into that severe caloric restriction stage and you are experiencing
it as a stressor, being able to process that in a more positive way rather than negative way
probably is going to lift those kind of negative physiological consequences.
And a lot of people are going to hear that and go, oh, that's impossible.
And I know it really isn't impossible.
It's absolutely possible is literally what the stress research does.
OK, interesting topic.
Maybe that'll be a podcast topic in the future.
I know you need to go so we can wrap up.
So is there anything you want to conclude with?
Any takeaways?
What's the bottom line?
Bottom line, make a joke about that statement before we hit record.
What's What's the?
Human AI.
Yeah, I was.
Yeah.
If you see, bottom line, basically any captions usually written by ChatGPT.
But it's unfortunate because I used to finish all of my posts with that and now I feel like I can't.
Anyway, what's the what's the bottom line for our podcast?
The bottom line for the podcast is that the post workout recovery process is what limits whether or
not you can do another workout successfully and produce a high hypertrophy stimulus.
It's got nothing to do with hypertrophy stimulus period.
That is not a limiting factor as far as any other day to say.
I would also add that I think that the Tagayaki studies are fantastic.
If anybody's really interested in them, I strongly suggest they actually grab all three papers and
read them.
I think they tell a really nice story.
They're incredibly well written.
If you just literally start reading them, you'll get a lot out of the introductions, a lot out of
the discussion sections.
I'm normally incredibly critical of introductions and discussion sections in most of the literature.
I think most of the time they're written very quickly and without kind of attention to the reader.
These are written for the reader.
They are written to guide you through the process of what they did.
Really, really, really nice work.
Can't speak highly enough of what they've done in these papers.
I'd love them to bits.
I don't talk about them very much because, as I say, post workout fatigue generally means that
they're not relevant for most situations.
But they do tell a really cool story and they show how oxidative stress is a negative effect on
hypertrophy and specifically on most protein synthesis rate relations.
So I know it's been a technical episode, but I hope people have got something out of it.
Thank you guys for listening to our mtor episode.
We'll be back next week with a new topic.