Episode: 042 How to build the biggest arms possible
URL: https://open.spotify.com/episode/5f914DR8FMaI875y5czPcT
Published: 2026-03-09
================================================================================

Welcome back.
Thank you for joining us for another episode of Hypertrophy past and present.
And this week it's my turn to be sick.
You were sick a few weeks ago, Chris, and now I've lost my voice.
I hopefully don't sound too off and hopefully it holds out.
Ben, I'm feeling OK, so hoping for the best.
How are you doing today?
I'm doing well.
Thanks, Jake.
You're not sick.
I'm not sick, no.
You're the healthy of the pair today.
I am indeed.
So today we are doing a requested topic.
It's a topic you've had a lot of questions about, and it's a topic that's probably been popular for
for a lot close.
Yeah.
Forever.
Yeah, at least at least a century.
We'll be talking about how they are approaching this, the best part of a century ago.
So it's probably not going away anytime soon.
And that topic is how to develop the biggest arms possible.
So there's plenty of us to talk about.
I'm excited to do it.
But we're going to start by talking about how the silver era lifters thought best to tackle that
that approach.
Well, maybe not silver.
We're kind of talking golden.
Yeah.
Late silver, early golden.
We're talking Chuck Sipes.
We have talked Chuck Sipes at least once, maybe maybe twice, once or twice in the past.
So Chuck, he's an interesting sort of, you know, time in in their bodybuilding piece because he was
competing in the late 50s, so arguably silver era before anabolics were kind of really widely being
used.
And then he continued competing into the 60s and he continued sort of writing and teaching and doing
things into the 70s.
So he sort of occupied that transitional period.
And personally, when I look at his routines, I think it's clear that he occupied that transitional
period because some of the stuff he talks about makes a lot of sense to me.
Somebody makes a lot less sense to me.
And you know, to be fair, he does claim or he did claim that he was naturally did speak out against
anabolics quite heavily.
Obviously that doesn't necessarily mean anything, but just for a little bit of context for you guys.
So this is his arms routine now.
He did split his his arms up.
So he did split his biceps work from his triceps work.
So I'm gonna give you guys the biceps portion and then the triceps portion of this workout.
So obviously this would be added to your standard workout.
You'd still be doing all other muscle groups as well.
But today we're articularly focused and interested on the arms.
So starting with biceps, we have cheat barbell curls, which have honestly fallen out of favour
nowadays.
But they were big in the silver era and I guess into the golden era.
And they are something I've actually used a little bit in my groups as well.
And I'm interested to hear your thoughts on them in a moment.
But nonetheless, we're starting with cheat barbell curls.
Anyone who doesn't know how to do them, it's kind of exactly what it sounds like.
Use a little bit of body English to get the their barbell curl up and you don't do like a super slow
eccentric.
Sometimes when people do do them today, they're doing like 5 second eccentrics.
No, it is a relatively standard eccentric.
You were just using a heavier load that would have been possible otherwise.
Now he did 8 sets of these and he would reduce the number of repetitions each time.
So you would start with eight and you'd go all the way down to, to singles.
He, he did a lot of kind of funny repetition schemes.
He'd often do like, you know, 1098 down to one, sometimes back up to 10 all over the place.
So a few fancy things are happening.
His next exercise he'd exercise he did was a preacher bench curl for six sets of four, then a
dumbbell concentration curl, 4 sets of eight and then biceps chin UPS.
So I'm assuming just supinated schedule playing chin up, four sets of 6.
And then we have a barbell wrist curl.
So in a, in a supinated position, four sets of 25, which I'm assuming honestly it's probably just a
weight issue.
Again, that's pretty hard exercise to to really load up adequately.
And then he concluded with a standing barbell reverse curl and that was for four sets of eight.
It's a fair bit of arms work, a fair bit of biceps work.
And then our triceps workout began with a barbell bench press or a close grip bench.
And he did the same routine where he did the eight sets, starting with eight and running down to
singles.
And then we had a dumbbell triceps press, which I believe would have been done, I assume sitting,
maybe to standing, I'm not sure, but it'll be like a French press.
So dumbbell overhead, extending it above head, which is a fairly common exercise in the sort of
later silver era.
Dredge Park use this a lot in his arms work as well.
And I think even Steve Reeves did a little bit as well.
And that was six sets of 6.
And then we had triceps pushdowns.
So obviously with the cable, four sets of 12.
And then weighted dips, which were another very popular triceps exercise.
Again, Dredge Park use these.
Marvin EDA obviously is a big fan of these.
So they're a pretty popular triceps builder.
And this was done for four sets of four.
Now, I don't know how Chuck did the dips, but generally in the silver area when they're doing dips
triceps, they were pretty intentional about their their form when they're doing it.
And they did usually emphasize having a close degree of keeping their elbows a little bit more
tucked to the side of the body and usually keeping their torso more upright and less leaning
forward.
Is is generally how they would recommend doing it?
Yeah.
Both of these workouts were repeated twice per week.
It's a lot of volume.
Chris, what do you make of this?
Yeah, I mean, this is very clearly a early golden era program, isn't it?
I mean, it's, it's absolutely not a silver era program at all.
There's there's quite a lot of with.
Kind of the exception of the excise selection.
Sure.
So this is kind of like similar to that conversation we had.
Yeah, Congress, it was last week or the week before and there was a program that had that kind of
excise selection kind of that was reminiscent of the Silver era, but then with a lot of Golden era
style volumes.
I think we've got that again here, but I think there's actually quite a lot of interesting stuff to
say.
So the Cheap Barbell Co, I mean, let's just go through things on it 1 by 1.
So Cheap Barbell Co, obviously it's technically an eccentric overload exercise.
What we're doing is we're allowing, as you said, a higher level of effort to be used in the lowering
phase compared to what we would get normally if we just lifted, you know, with sort of a normal form
on the concentric phase.
What that means is that you're going to get quite a lot of calcium.
I relate fatigue from that exercise.
You're going to get a lot there for a post workout muscle damage and it's not there for an exercise
that I would typically recommend people do.
But even more so, I would absolutely not recommend doing it as the first exercise in the worker.
Because any exercise you then do for the same muscle groups is going to suffer from that excessive
calcium ROT, which is reducing the kind of retention, which is reducing the stimulus you're going to
get.
So This is why if you look at the dose response curves for of hypertrophy to training volume for
normal strength training, they are nonlinear, but they are nonlinear in a way that kind of plateaus
maybe somewhere between 5:00 and 8:00 sets per workout per muscle group.
If you look at the eccentric dose response literature, which is much kind of obviously there's,
there's a lot less of it, but you start to see kind of plateaus happening at maybe two or three sets
per workout per muscle group.
And that's because when you get enough calcium Iosin to the end to the muscle fibers, they can't
experience any tension.
And so your additional sets just aren't doing anything.
And I think that's the problem that we have.
If we start doing something like a cheat curl as the first exercise and a workout, then we're going
to do a whole lot of other elbow flexor work.
It really isn't helping our case because we're just going to stop the growth stimulus from happening
because we're stopping the tension from being produced or detected.
Now beyond that concerns and beyond this sort of, I guess, exercise order issue that you've
highlighted, what particularly is happening in this exercise or what potentially is being
accomplished in this exercise compared to just doing a standard barbell curl?
So if you were to ignore the eccentric phase, then you would be be getting obviously a lot of
assistance in the beginning of the exercise.
Now the external moment time is hardest exactly in the middle.
So really your momentum, if it just is giving you help in the first part isn't really doing a lot
because it's not actually that difficult in the first part.
So you've got to get your momentum to the point where it gets you past that sticking point in the
middle.
So really what you're doing is you're making the exercise slightly harder towards the top, which is
going to then obviously give you a little bit more Brachioradialis kind of involvement because that
is the elbow flex.
That kind of starts to become more important in the top half or you know, certainly last sort of
third or so.
The range of motion, it's very, very important relative to all the muscles in the group.
So you're kind of getting a little bit of a change in the kind of targeting effect to the exercise,
but then obviously ease ending phase, it really depends on where you're going to slow down.
So if you kind of just allow it to sort of do its normal thing, it will be most difficult pretty
much exactly the external moment time being longest, which is at 90°.
So it really depends on what you're doing.
I mean like if you're treating it as a kind of exercise where you're not really giving a lot of
emphasis to the lowering phase, which is is not really how it's done.
Most people do.
But if you're kind of just allowing yourself to get into that top half of the range of motion, then
it just changes the focus of the of the moment.
Yeah.
OK.
So you're, you're shifting a little bit away from biases Tracky, a little bit more towards Bracky
Radialis.
Now obviously he's gone down into some fairly low repetitions here.
So the eccentric load that he's using is gonna be a very high eccentric load.
So you are actually gonna get potentially some benefit out of that compared to just standard normal
sets with normal loading, Yeah.
So it's going to be a different effect.
So you're going to be applying that kind of passive tension across the entirety of the muscle.
The problem is that the elbow flexes seem to have plateaus with the active link 10s relationship on
the end of the kind of excise range of motion.
So basically with the extended elbow position, you're actually still only in the plateau for most of
the elbow flexes.
So it's actually unclear whether we're going to get any psychromatogenesis from those muscle fibers
anyway.
Now the kind of easy to go over there would be or easy to go any training would be the only way you
would ever likely to get that thing.
But even then, I'm not convinced that you would.
And, and I don't know if you want to go into this or not, is there potentially anything else that
could be happening from a strength perspective, costume perspective or is that speculative?
So yeah, I mean it's you might, you might get a little bit more.
Well, I mean, obviously you're going to get some eccentric related adaptations such as maybe Titan,
maybe customers, but you're talking more down the strength through really rather than down the kind
of hypertrophy route.
Yeah, because what I find interesting with this exercise is the way that it's talked about in the
Silver era was it was a plateau Buster.
And the way that I understand that when I see these guys talking about it is it was a strength Pluto
Buster.
And it makes me wonder, is it perhaps they associated strength and hypertrophy together, which
naturally one would, and maybe they've realized his excise was making them stronger.
Maybe it wasn't actually making them bigger per SE beyond what a normal curl would, but there was
something happening to a strength perspective.
That's my assumption with it.
That's why I personally use it intermittently.
But I mean, the passive tension 1 is an interesting one because yeah, you would assume there's
probably not going to be much benefit to that.
So it presumably is something else happening if people are noticing it's getting them stronger.
It's very possible, yeah.
So the next what do we have next?
We had.
So yeah, we've got preacher curls now.
I think preacher curls are really interesting because what we're getting here is to changes relative
to a sort of standing barbell curl or a standing dumbbell curl.
So obviously with the preacher curl, what we're getting is a change in the resistance profile at the
elbow.
So obviously the exercise becomes harder, more towards the extended elbow position, and that does
the opposite of what we were just saying with the cheek curl.
It pushes the kind of activation across to the non the other muscles that aren't the
brachioradialis.
So the brachialis and the biceps brachy.
So eventually the those are the muscles then start to get targeted instead.
So that's the the first thing that you would notice about the preschool.
And then of course the other thing that happens is you're you're moving the shoulder into a more
flexed position.
So essentially we're lifting the shoulder up by elevating the shoulder and that's going to start to
because the biceps brachial effects as that start to shorten the Bisys brachy and that's going to
change the leverage of the Bisys brachy file reflection relative to the brachy brachialis.
So what we've got is 2 things going on.
Now if you kind of want to start tracking down what you think that implication is going to be from a
leverages point of view, you'll find that there's not an enormous amount of interesting or useful
data.
There are some activation indications, there are some hypertrophy training studies implications that
imply that maybe the brachialis has got have better leverage in that preach curl situation than the
bices Brachy.
Recently I actually tracked down a very, very interesting muscle damage study where they did preach
A curl eccentrics and they showed that the only muscle that swelled in the post workout period was
the brachialis.
And it's really massive difference between the brachialis and the other muscles.
So that does suggest quite strongly that the preach curl is kind of targeting more so the brachialis
in comparison with the brachioradialis or the bices brachia.
So that's interesting in the context of this workout because now what we've got is exercise one
seems to be more brachygardialis, exercise 2 seems to be more brachialis, and the next exercise
we've got is a dumbbell concentration curl, which depending exactly how he's performing, it arguably
might have been more biases Brachy.
Yeah, I think a lot comes down to the way that you are performing.
I mean, ultimately what we want for a bias, it's brachy exercise, Then by by by process of deduction
is we want to be in a position where the shoulder is extended or at least by the side of the body.
I mean, which you know, to be honest is many bicycle variations are already in that position or
elbow flexor curls are in that position.
But what we also want is the exercise to be hardest in a starting point.
And that's where most curls are going to fall down because gravity just doesn't really let you do
that.
Gravity is going to make it so the external moment time is hardest with the elbow at 90°.
What you want it is for the elbow to be, you know, kind of sort of 0° or 80° depending which way
you're measuring it.
You want to be at the starting point, Elway fully extended.
So the way we would do that is by just sitting down in a incline bench situation and using a cable
coming from behind us to create the hardest part at the beginning of the exercise with both the
extended children and the extended elbow.
And that's probably going to give you the most bias.
It's Bracky kind of out of the out of the group, but in terms of this, what we've got here, I
dumbbell concentration, it's just really difficult to know whether what position he's in and where
the.
A lot of the time these guys would actually dead stop between repetitions, which I quite like
because it does.
I don't know if anyone's ever tried like people listening, if you guys have tried this.
But when I, if I ever perform a dumbbell concentration curl, I actually do prefer to dead stop.
And it does allow one to use a heavier load and it does allow that that sort of starting position of
the exercise to be more challenging than if you're sort of not dead stopping that exercise.
So I find that does, yes, obviously external moment, I was still going to be longer higher up.
I get that.
But it does make it more challenging in that more extended elbow position than it would be
otherwise.
So that's my preferred way to do it.
I don't know if Chuck did it this way, but it's I do see a lot of the silver golden era guys doing
it like that.
So, yeah, so you know, maybe that has a little bit more focus on the on the weispacular.
Maybe it doesn't.
I don't know.
Biceps.
Chins.
I'm going to assume this.
1.
I'm going to assume that's a reason it is because it's actually not named correctly.
If I'm going to make 2 assumptions about this, I'm going to make the assumption that the the grip
width is either shoulder width or slightly narrower.
I mean, like I would, I would even go as far as to suggest that maybe it was even with the hands
pressed together because when I did a lot of chin kind of training, if I moved my hands close
together, I would definitely feel that more so in my elbow flexors than in in the lap.
But that's just kind of my experience.
So I'm going to assume it's at least size tall or narrower and I'm going to assume that he's
actually getting his chin over the bar.
Now that may not be true.
In fact, neither of those things may be true.
I'm just going to make those two assumptions.
If those two assumptions are correct, then the Bisys brachy are probably not a limiting factor
because the Bisys brachy are shoulder flexors, especially in the top part of the range of motion
and.
As I assume they probably did go all the way up a lot of the again, a lot of the silver area guys,
they made a very sort of considered effort to actually get bar 2 chest.
So they were fully getting.
Over the definitely switching the Bisys brachy off in that position because of the two joint muscle
problem or antagonist inhibition or whatever you want to call it.
So ultimately it means that that becomes a much more brachialis and brachioradialis exercise in that
kind of sticking point and just kind of for people who are like sitting there going, oh, this
doesn't make any sense to me.
Why is that the case?
Just think about a chin up situation, because ultimately the external moment, Tom has to be hardest
in the middle, but there's no way that people get stuck there.
They all get stuck trying to get their chin over the bar.
That lasts a little bit.
That should.
So when you say sort of moment, so essentially your body you're furthest away when you're that that
sort of halfway mark.
So that should naturally be where it's noise difficult.
Getting started and finishing should be easy in the same way that getting started and finishing
should be easy for a biceps curl, because the hardest part of the exercise is in the middle.
Same thing really, to a lesser degree because multi joint allows you to move your body around a
little bit so you don't get quite the same degree of of of of difference.
But it's still going to be hardest in the middle from an external point of view.
And also the LAT has amazing leverage for and, and just to be clear to people, even if people don't
agree with neuro mechanical matching and we'll have this kind of, we'll make some comments on this
later.
But even if people don't agree with neuro mechanical matching, it's not relevant because what I'm
saying here is not about selecting muscles.
It's about simply how much torque you're able to generate at different points in the range of
motion.
I'm saying that from a lat point of view, you're able to generate massive amounts of torque in the
top part of the range of motion as you're coming to the end of the exercise with the lat, simply
because it has such amazing leverage in that position.
So you're not going to be limited by the lat in the top part of the range of motion when you're
pulling your chin over the bar.
So you're not that isn't the sticking point or it's not causing the sticking point.
So if you're struggling to get each other the bar, it's not the lat that's not doing that.
It's got to be the LBO flexors that are not doing that.
And the LBO flexors obviously, you know, aren't necessarily kind of all going to be working because
of that two joint inhibition problem.
So it basically comes down to getting each other the bar is a brachialis and brachialis problem.
So this not correctly named to call it a biceps chins, although we all kind of call LBO flexors
biceps all the time.
So it's not really that big a deal.
Well, it's isn't it though?
Because it is a big deal.
Because the alternative.
Well, it's caused a lot of confusion to a lot of people, but yeah.
Well, the alternative would be a pronated like a a.
Think about like a wide pronated grip, right?
And naturally people are going to it.
So we're talking like frontal plane and people I think will naturally look at this and assume, yes,
close grip supinated.
That's going to be more biases Brackie.
And this is what I was always taught.
That's going to be more biases, Brackie, than doing a a wide frontal plane.
It's Bracky.
It's Bracky Radiolis I think mainly.
In terms of the the chin up like the close grip, yes.
And my point is what you've just said there around the two joint problem with the biases, Brackie,
that arguably is going to be a lot less of an issue in a wide grip pull up.
So you could actually argue you're probably going to get more biases, Jackie, of those two
variations in the wide grip pull up than you would in the quote UN quote biceps chin up, the close
grips supinated.
Yeah, I mean, but I also think that with the wide grip you end up with a lot more lat.
I'm not saying you should.
One should do it as a biceps exercise, but out of those two, which one naturally would you think
like it, presumably?
Honest, honestly, I think it's just, it's just simply not a good exercise for the Bisox Brachy.
I mean, I think ultimately the, the narrow grip chin is actually a really solid exercise for the
Iraqi Radiol this.
I mean, it's, it's very, very effective at that.
I don't think chins of any kind are particularly amazing for Bisox Brachy.
Yeah, if you were to stop where the external momentum is in fact most difficult.
Then it would actually become a lat exercise again.
Yeah.
Or if you stopped even like maybe sort of with the bar level with your eyes, something like that.
It depends.
I mean, everybody's going to have a slightly different point to which the elbow flexor or the biceps
brachy shoulder flexion leverage appears.
Because ultimately this is, this is just kind of a very quick rabbit hole.
This is why it's, it's important to state, This is why it's important to reject this idea that 2
joint muscles stop working in multi joint exercises because they're not changing length.
This is why we have to reject this idea.
This is why when people say, oh, the hamstrings don't work in the squat because they're not changing
length, I stop them And I say, no, that's not correct.
It's absolutely not correct.
And I can show you it's not correct in two seconds because we've got studies of isometric squat
positions where people are doing an isometric squat, the kind of knee extension and hip extension,
forced production, and the hamstrings are not working in that scenario.
So it's not because no muscles are changing length in an isometric squad, but the hamstrings still
get switched off.
Why are they getting switched off?
They get switched off because they're producing antagonist torques at the knee, which will be a knee
flexion instead of the knee extension that you're trying to create, even though your hip extension
tort will be beneficial to you.
So they switch off because it's highly inefficient to have two torch, one that's giving you a
positive effect, one gives you a negative effect.
So instead we actually use the knee extensors without the disadvantage of the hamstrings, and we
switch off the hamstrings and we use just the glutes and the adductive Magnus.
That's how it works.
The same thing happens in the shoulder.
So when I'm doing shoulder extension, I'm pulling downwards in the surgical plane.
I'm going to use the biceps brache as elbow flexors to help me doing that pulling motion until they
start producing a torque at the shoulder.
And that's why we look and we say, OK, well, where did the Bices Brackie have torque producing
capacity at the shoulders, shoulder flexion?
Well, only really within 45°, the anatomical position.
And so ultimately what you see is that if I'm pulling from overhead, I get down to 90 in it.
The Bices Brackie are perfectly happy doing elbow flexion at that point, But as soon as I get down
to about 45°, they're going to have to switch off and they will do that.
Now, everybody's probably got slightly different points.
Essentially where your chin is getting over the bar, in case anyone's.
In most people, it'll be in most people it'll be 45° will be approximately getting from where the
hand is level with the eyes to where the hand is level with the chin.
That lasts sort of 6 to 12 inches of of distance.
That is basically where people are going to be struggling in the chin up, which is exactly what we
see.
And it's because your elbow flexors suddenly go from having four muscles to two muscles.
And it's just like you can't get around that fact.
And I think, but I do also think that different people have different, I mean, this is a, a true
statement of any of any muscle, but everybody's got slightly different leverages.
And I think that people have different biceps short deflection leverages.
And I think if somebody's got really strong biceps short deflection leverage, what they'll find is
that they probably get their biceps wrecky switched off earlier and they'll end up relying more on
their lat and more on their brachyrhadialis and brachialis and less on the biceps brachy.
Somebody who's the opposite might find that they can get almost all the way down.
I believe personally that people who are capable of doing a one arm lock off without really having
to train very much for, you know, kind of weighted chins or one arm chin UPS.
I think they're probably just people who've got virtually no shoulder flexion, leverage of the
biceps, brachy at all.
You know, and I've met people like that and I've just been astounded by how easy it is for them
when, you know, I got to the point where actually doing a one on chin and my lock off was still
terrible.
So for those people, they would potentially actually be getting a little bit more biased with Draki
stimulus throughout this exercise.
I think they would exactly.
So I think you are going to find this going to be a little bit of difference there.
But I mean fundamentally it is a shoulder flex.
It's just at what point does it switch off?
And I think people are just going to probably find that there's maybe switches off either it's
slightly earlier or slightly later, but it's a really fascinating kind of phenomenon and it actually
really changes the way you think about a narrow grip or sagittal plane kind of pulling exercises.
And either way, you're still going to be getting some Dracula and Bracula radialis.
So, you know, if someone's listening to this, oh, well, this is rubbish because I did chin ups and
my, my arms grew huge.
It's like, yeah, well, I.
Did my brachioradialis grew like a weed?
And that was the first thing people commented on when I was doing a lot of one arm chin work, it was
like your Brachioradialis is gigantic.
You know?
Literally people have said that to me.
Yeah, so that's, you know, I've got a grow decent arms.
It's just, it's not.
But this comes back to the terminology problem where people refer to an hour flexor exercise as a
biceps exercise and it's just not.
It causes a lot of confusion because people don't understand that.
It's like they think that there's just like 1 great big muscle that it's like the people who think
that a muscle is just one muscle fiber, you know, it's one gigantic muscle fiber like a big snail.
And it's not, it's obviously like, you know, hundreds of thousands of muscle fibers.
And obviously in this case divided into 4 main regions, although we'll talk about some subdivisions
of that later on.
Yeah.
So no, there's, there's some really cool stuff going on there, which I think is worth being aware
of.
So what else have we got?
Well, we've got another.
Oh no, we've got risk girls now.
Sorry, I missed that.
We've got some risk, risk girls, which, you know, fair enough.
I'm not going to comment too much on that because I haven't done much work on different wrist
exercises.
Honestly, I think if anybody's interested in training wrist muscle, they should just look at what
the arm wrestlers are doing.
I mean, they obviously have that down to pretty fine art.
And then finally we've got standing Barber reverse curls, which obviously is, you know, the reverse
grip is going to give you more Brachioradialis.
Interestingly, I would say this programme as a whole is very much heavy on the Brachioradialis side.
It is it's, it's definitely lightest on the devices, Jackie.
And it's very light on the Bices Bracky side, yeah.
Which arguably is the most challenging in terms of using dumbbells and barbells?
Yes.
I mean really what you would have to do is lice supine on a bench I think probably.
Do you know there's an exercise they used to do?
I've been talking like.
Like it would be like a, it would like kind of a preacher curl situation.
Would that work?
Keep talking, I'll think about.
That let me tell you this exercise because I it, it takes a lot of boxes, but when you do it, it
feels like garbage and you'll literally lie flat on the floor, not on a bench, just on the floor.
You have your arms fully extended and then you do a curl with your arms flattening and.
That's what I was thinking.
Yeah, that's what I was thinking more or.
Less and it makes a lot of sense and you do it and it feels like trash.
Wow.
But there are some people who did it.
I saw silly airlifted, I forget who, but I saw them like, Oh my God, they solved this issue.
And then when I did it, I'm like, no, they didn't solve it.
If you, if you, if you had a slight, a very, very low bench, incredibly low bench, just like a
couple of blocks on the floor, like those kind of steps that people sometimes use in the gym and
just give yourself like 1020° of shoulder extension, would that help?
Yeah, probably.
That would be really interesting to try that.
Yeah, maybe I'll have a bit of a play.
I'm sure that by the following week when we talk again, somebody would have done something on TikTok
about it.
But to be honest.
You mean you can just sit in a kind of incline bench sort of set up and use a horizontal cable from
behind you?
I mean, that's probably.
The it's easier the cable, absolutely.
And in fact, there's even machines I've seen there's a machine and the not the gym that I'm going to
at the moment, but the one I was going to last year and of last year, they had it literally just a
seat and there was just two cables.
And yeah, portrait I do.
It's very, very simple.
Kind of I said anyway, triceps.
So we've got a standard barbell bench press.
OK, fine, probably as you said, narrow grip, perfectly fine for training media and lateral head to
the triceps, The overhead triceps press OK, fine, more media and lateral head work, push downs, OK,
some long head work and then dips.
OK, So dips are really interesting.
So just let me kind of comment on this again from A2 joint muscle perspective.
So basically the long head is a shorter extensor.
So we expect it not to work in most pressing activities.
But again, you've got to look at where it has best leverage for shoulder extension.
It's got best leverage for shoulder extension when the arm is overhead.
So really kind of doing that sort of the top part of the size to plane kind of shoulder extension
range of motions where it's doing most of its work.
And as you come down to the anatomical position, the leverage is absolutely sailing towards 0.
Like just it's really clear that it's going towards 0 and it comes all the way down to 0 at the
anatomical position.
And then of course, nobody collects any data past that point.
So it's entirely possible that if you just extrapolate that line, you end up actually pushing the
long head into being a shoulder flexor in the opposite position.
Now, just to be clear, there are shoulder muscles that do do that.
You can see them if you go past the range of motion.
You can see some like parts of the deltoid or PEC convex kind of looking like they're crossing over
between one side of the line and the other.
So that's not unheard of.
So I think it's entirely possible that a long head could be a flexor in that behind the back
position, in which case dips would actually toast the long head completely because you'd be asking
it to do shoulder flexion at the same time as our extension.
And that would be really putting it into a position of, you know, requiring to activate very, very
extensively.
Now, I think it's entirely possible that's true.
And it might even be another one of those individual things where some people experience that some
people that might explain why some people have just ridiculous dip strength.
Like in my case, it's entirely possible that I've got that ability to use the long head as a
shoulder flexor in that in that behind the back position, which is why I can, you know, look like a
twig and still move monstrous.
So I think that that again, could be one of those variances.
But I think that makes it a very, very interesting exercise for people who who, you know, kind of
feel it or people who can move a lot of weight on it.
I think it probably does classify as being a very very interesting triceps exercise.
And people keep asking that question about the long head and the dips, and I can't answer.
We don't have it.
We don't know.
I don't there is no data.
Nobody's collected that information.
So, you know, there's a little bit of obviously there's a lot of anecdotal evidence, there's a lot
of speculation about at the end of the day, yes, it's possible.
No, I don't know what whether it's actually happening or not.
So perhaps the question to us, I mean do we need to comment on the volume?
I don't know if we need to say anything.
The boy who was just completely off the charts.
It's not even worth, you know, kind of analysing.
I mean it.
Clearly twice a week.
Well how?
And there's a couple of things working for him OK, so the the first exercise in both workouts he he
is predominantly doing low repetition sets.
So even though there's 8.
Sets the cheek curl is cancelling that out, and more than cancelling it out so.
And then obviously the risk curl, I mean that's not really.
It's indefensible.
This level of volume isn't sensible.
There's no scenario in which you can argue that this is sensible.
OK.
And then the triceps look, honestly the triceps is the more defensible workout if it weren't for the
push downs at sets of 12.
I mean, it's still it's still too high, but the dips four sets of four totally fine.
The bench, most of that is sub 4 repetitions.
Those two combined would be fine.
But then adding on six sets of 6 plus the pushdowns, yeah, it's just even a twice a week.
It's just it's hectic.
OK, yeah.
So volume, yeah, probably not going to be recoverable for anyone.
Now, I don't know where you want to go with this.
It'll be interesting to talk about what exercise selection we would do differently.
You touched on some of that as you went through this, but is there somewhere else you want to go
first before we get to that?
There is, yes.
So we've had this conversation before, but I keep seeing the error being made and I keep seeing
people ignoring it.
This is like those topics that we've talked about previously where people sail on past the point
that I'm making, completely failing to address it.
And that's why they just keep ending up making the same error again and again and again.
So we've talked, We headed a whole episode about voluntary activation deficits.
And basically I explained how voluntary activation deficits work.
I explained why we've got them.
I explained, you know, all the various features of them, and people kind of just responded by
saying, no, no, no, no, we don't believe that they're happening and they're OK.
Well, then live in your own Little Dream world then, because, you know, they are happening.
But I want to just start out by explaining why the voluntary activation deficit is important even
when you're dealing with a muscle group like the elbow flexor complex or the elbow extensor complex,
which on the face of it don't seem to display very large deficits.
OK, Because that's what people are going to say.
They're going to say, Oh, well, you know, we looked at the this study and it showed that there was
no meaningful voluntary activation deficit or it's like 2% or 3% or whatever.
OK, fine.
So if that's your starting point, listen very carefully to what I'm about to say because it will
change your point of view if you're actually prepared to listen.
So if I do a voluntary activation test, what I'm doing is I'm comparing the force I can generate
voluntarily with the force I can generate voluntarily plus any involuntary force from an actual
stimulation.
That's what I'm comparing those two things.
So essentially any additional force I can generate with the involuntary twitch is telling me that
muscle fibers were not activated voluntarily, which are now being activated involuntarily with the
stimulation.
That's what we're saying.
Now.
Importantly, I'm testing that by reference to the external torque that's being generated in both
cases.
So if I activate a muscle fiber in the elbow flex complex that does not have a leverage to produce
torque in the direction I'm testing that or at the joint angle I'm testing it at, then it will not
actually register as a part of the voluntary activation deficit.
So let's imagine, and we're going to talk about this again in a few minutes, but let's imagine that
I'm testing elbow flexion voluntary activation deficit.
And so I've got my elbow at 90° because that's kind of halfway between where the Brachyridialis are
going to be most active and by such Brachy and Brachyolis are going to be most active.
So I'm at 90° and I'm producing a maximum amount of isometric torque that I can produce.
And I then test electrical simulation to see how much extra torque I can generate with that
electrical kind of involuntary contraction.
And let's say I kind of get 2% or something like that.
So you can go, OK, well, no, that's no big deal.
OK, What happens though, if I've got a whole bunch of muscle fibers in the medial part of my biceps,
blackie long head, which are really amazing at supination and have absolutely zero ability to do
flexion whatsoever?
You're actually not.
You could activate those with your involuntary stimulation.
They could all activate and no extra torque regenerate 0.
So I've activated all those fibres and I've used the electric simulation to activate those fibres,
but I've not produced any benefit from doing that whatsoever.
So it doesn't register as an increase in torque production in the involuntary side of the equation.
And so I don't register it as a problem.
It literally just doesn't register as a problem.
So what you call then is muscle fibers that are not being activated.
So they're technically part of your voluntary activation deficit as far as we're concerned from a
hypertrophy point of view, from a bio mechanics point of view, it's not relevant because what we're
saying is we're not activating fibers that we can't use.
OK, fine.
We're not activating fibers that we can't use.
With my hypertrophy point of view, it's absolutely relevant because you're, you're trying to do is
say, am I training all of the elbow flex complex?
Well, no, you're not, because you're not activating fibers that are capable of doing supination but
aren't capable of doing flexion.
Yeah, Yeah.
I mean, in the same way, you know, if you were, if they were testing a curl and then suddenly
someone starts activating the quads, that's not going to change anything on the test.
You're not going to see that increase in mode and improvement in the quads.
And you're saying, well, it's the same thing.
If there's muscle fibers that can't actually do that thing you're testing within that muscle.
And we know that there's going to be for, I mean for any muscle we're testing, that's going to be
the case.
Yeah, I'm just giving an example that I've actually got studies to to justify.
So I'm I've literally, there are studies in the 1980s where people looked at the bicespracky long
head and they found that some muscle fibers in the lateral part do flexion and some muscle fibers in
the medial part do supination.
And you literally have it and, you know, they just don't get activated if you're not doing those
particular actions.
So it's a perfect example of what we're talking about here.
Yeah.
So if if someone says, hey, no biases, Jackie has, you know, 99% voluntary activation, that does not
mean 99% of those muscle fibres, pneumonia units are being recruited or active in that test.
No, it doesn't exactly.
And, and, and just to be clear again, we'd covered this when we did the episode on voluntary
activation deficit.
I'm just going to repeat it again here.
When we test voluntary activation deficits, there are a couple of features which are very important.
Firstly, we test them in unilateral movements.
Now whether or not you think that you know the bilateral deficit is caused by muscle mass or whether
you think it's caused by something else doesn't really matter.
The point is that everybody recognises that bilateral deficit is is there and it happens and you end
up with a substantially higher level of recruitment in a unilateral movement compared to a bilateral
movement.
So again, if you're testing unilaterally, you're not going to take the voluntary activation deficit
that you are going to get in a normal strength training exercise.
And then again, we all recognize that stability has an enormous effect on motive improvement.
Well, dynamometry.
Is off the top end of stability.
Like if you think your, your machine exercise is stable, wait till you see a dynamometer.
I mean, like it's like you're strapped and you can't move.
So ultimately there's a very, there's two really big factors there which mean that when you're
trying to go, Oh, well, I'm just going to do my normal kind of biceps curls with dumbbells and I'm
going to be all right, Jack, you're not.
Because you're actually going to see massive difference between that standing 2 armed dumbbell curl
with, you know, kind of free weights compared to a stable situation in a dynamometer and a kind of
unilateral scenario.
So if you couple these three, if you add these, all these three things together, couple those two
with what we said earlier about the voluntary activation deficit, not including fibres that don't do
the torque direction that you're interested in.
You actually have three really huge factors that 'cause that voluntary activation deficit to be
hugely greater in the free weight a normal gym scenario compared to the scenario that you're
measuring in the laboratory context.
So ultimately, you know, if you're looking at a laboratory derived voluntary activation measuring,
you're saying, oh, that's 98 percent, 99%, ninety, 7% or whatever the number is, therefore I can
ignore it.
You're fundamentally not understanding how you go from that laboratory scenario to the gym and take
into account the other factors that we're already aware of that change that deficit and make it a
lot bigger.
Think the part of that that I find most interesting is that if you think about the implication of
the leverage part, so saying that, hey, there's mode units here that that actually can't produce
torque and they're not being measured, that tells us it's not just the same mode units every single
time that you're not able to access, right?
So if someone says, oh, the bicep tracker has, you know, 98% voluntary activation and then one might
think, oh, that's fine, there's cheapest that I'm never going to get.
But no, no, no, what you're saying is there's actually some of those mode units you'll get in one
exercise and then not in another and you'll get some of those in another.
And it actually is an an argument for why one must be using different exercises, high variety of
exercises if they're wanting to maximize hypertrophy.
Yeah.
And in fact, there's actually no downside really.
I mean, there is a like people go, Oh no, no, no, you need to do more sets per per exercise to
maximize the stimulus.
And I'm like, really?
Have you looked at the dose response relationships?
I mean, like seriously.
I mean, like just go back to the Schoenfeld metro analysis or, you know, look at the Pelham 1.
I mean, I think the Pelham 1 is kind of the, the curve is too steep because I think it includes a
lot of the more recent studies that have a lot of muscle swelling in them.
But if you go back to the Schermfelt and you just draw a basic kind of natural logarithm through
that data, what you find is that, you know, one set, OK, gives you, you know, kind of 1 arbitrary
unit if you like worth of hypertrophy stimulus.
Your second set is giving you, you know, like, you know, a tiny additional amount.
What is it?
I can't remember the number now.
It's like 30% or something, 39 percent is it?
So like you just get this and then the third set maybe gives you another kind of 20 something
percent on top of that.
So you know, it just there's, there's just really small additional benefit from doing an extra set
of the same exercise.
Much better to do an exercise that is training different muscle fibers in that group.
And then you're going to get, OK, some overlap, which is going to be in that 39% zone, but you're
also going to be getting, you know, every 510% of fibers that are not overlapping or even more.
I mean, I was really shocked when I looked at the, the, the muscle damage study of the, and it
showed that pretty much no swelling is happening in the bisex brachy and brachy radialis in a
preacherical scenario, which implies that the brachialis is getting absolutely toasted.
You know, So I think if anything I'm underestimating how important neural mechanical matching is.
So now that we've covered voluntary activation and that it is an issue for the elbow flexors and
every muscle.
Yeah, exactly.
So all that means is exactly what you were just leading us towards, which is that we have to
consider exercise selection as a high priority because that's the way that you ensure that this
voluntary activation deficit is not causing you a problem.
If you have a voluntary activation deficit in in, in any given exercise, what it means is that the
muscle fibres that are the least useful to you are the ones that get pushed to the top end of the
kind of Moat unit port.
Essentially they're the ones you can ignore.
So you're doing a elbow flexion exercise and the biceps bracky long head is going to ignore the
supination motor units to the last possible moment and probably not actually end up recruiting very
many of them.
And you know, just to be clear, when I'm talking about that example, those studies, these are 1980s
studies and they were actually interested about, you know, is there functional differentiation
between different heads of the biceps?
And that was what they're primarily interested in.
And people ask me that question all the time.
They go, you know, can I target 1 head of the biceps brachio or the other?
And I probably not, but there are still activation kind of clusters within the biceps brachy long
head.
So you will actually get different parts of that muscle being activated depending on whether you're
supinating or or flexing.
OK.
So related, but maybe a Jason question.
So there is a belief that the best exercises for hypertrophy compound multi joint, multi muscle
exercises and that isolation single joint exercises at the icing the top of the cake, you know,
maybe they're an E shape or whatever.
And hopefully it's not too many people who are listening to this who hold that belief.
But I'm surprised by how prevalent this place still is if we're talking about maximizing growth.
I mean you kind of answered it just in what you've covered so far, bit of those more compound type
exercises versus isolation type exercises which are going to be more suitable to our goal here.
Well, if we're aiming to, you know, kind of maximise arm size, then obviously you want to train the
arms.
You don't want to be training the rest of the kind of body with the exercises that you're using
target on.
I mean, ultimately, you know, there's, there's this push back against the idea that larger amounts
of muscle mass being used by, you know, in an exercise that mean lower activation per muscle group.
And that, I mean, that's just so easily verifiable across a number of different domains in the
exercise science literature.
I mean, you can see in the fatigue literature, you know, you can see it in literally like you just
go and look at the von tractivation deficits for all the major muscles of the body.
Start with the glute, work your way up to like the vices bracket.
And you'll notice that you can just literally draw a line, a straight line through the size of the
muscle versus von tractivation deficit.
The bigger the muscle, the bigger the deficit.
I mean, it's literally that obvious.
You know, there's an exception in the case of the hamstrings, but pretty much reliable kind of
relationship between muscle size and voluntary activation deficit.
Very, very straightforward.
And of course, you know, you've got bilateral force deficit as well, very clearly giving you an
example of larger amounts of muscle mass giving you bigger voluntary activation deficits.
So there's a whole load of different kind of sort of sources of data that you can look for.
And what it just means is that, and that's before we start talking about limiting factors.
So like, you know, ultimately if somebody says, well, I'm doing this multi joint exercise and it's I
think it's going to train all the muscles that are involved.
I'm like, yeah, but which one's the limiting factor?
Because one of them will be the limiting factor and they'll be the one that you experience highest
effort in and the others won't be maxed out to the same degree.
I mean, that's is highly unlikely that you're going to have an exercise that perfectly matches every
single, you know, muscle.
I mean, I talk about this all the time.
I say that every time I try and do benching or any pressing exercise.
My triceps just are the ones that kind of hit the limiting factor.
So for me, but actually, you know, kind of multi joint exercises do tend to be quite interesting for
for for arm work simply because my triceps have been put in a position of being the limiting factor.
But I could probably still get slightly higher recruitment in a single joint exercise simply because
I haven't got other muscles working at the same time.
And you've ultimately what we're always trying to do is limit the effort perceptions going to
anything other than or being related to anything other than the motin accruement to the target
muscle.
But I've heard that if you're doing a multi joint exercise that because there's more muscles being
used that means there's more More.
I don't even know how to attempt to steal man this argument.
No, no, I don't know how to construct.
The argument is literally that more muscles equal more central motor command somehow, and therefore
higher activation of everything that's being used.
How sometimes?
Return somehow.
I mean, that's so.
To be fair, so many of the arguments I see online just come down to, you know, a Palpatine Return
somehow, you know, somehow it's like, you know, I want this answer to be true.
Therefore I'm going to start from this observation and then insert somehow and then and then kind of
jump straight to the answer.
I mean, honestly, basically muscular failure happens because we hit maximum tolerable perceptions of
effort.
You know, anybody arguing that it happens because purely because of peripheral mechanisms actually
hasn't looked at what would happen if that were the case.
You know, it's actually not possible for that to be the case.
We're hitting maximum tolerable protection effort.
We even see the, I mean, there's an entire body of literature devoted to looking at how reps in
reserve and RPE match so that you hit maximum effort at the end of a set.
Maximum effort is literally the definition of you hitting muscular failure.
That's what it is.
So we hit the maximum tolerable protection effort, we stop.
And that means that you've basically got a kind of capacity of effort perception.
You're devoting that to whatever is required.
And it could be coordination, it could be burning sensation, the muscle, it could be cardiovascular
sensations.
And a big chunk of it is going to be the central motor command coming from the brain.
And that central motor ground has got to go somewhere.
And you've got to, if you've got more muscles being activated, you've got more central motor
commands being generated, and you're not going to be able to activate one muscle to the maximum
degree if you're sharing that centromatic command across a whole bunch of different places.
And there's so many ways that you can see that happening.
Like I talk about external focuses of attention a lot.
And people go, Oh yeah, external focus, attention, really motivating because you're setting this
external goal.
Therefore it should increase recruitment.
I'm like, well, it does increase, most likely increase central motor ground as a total.
But the problem is it doesn't increase recruitment in the muscle that you're interested in training.
Because what that does actually is the external focus spreads activation across more places because
your body is using more muscles to achieve the desired goal.
And because you're using more muscles to achieve the desired goal, you end up actually reducing
recruitment in the target one that you're training.
So there's lots of different kind of ways and angles that you can come at this problem, but they all
kind of bring you to the same place.
Then I've heard that perception of effort is not relevant to strength training.
So we just magically reach maximum effort at the end of every single set to failure.
Just a coincidence.
I'm just saying, I'm just saying what I've heard that apparently, apparently researchers are saying
the model doesn't apply to.
But the model was literally devised in strength training situations.
So if you look at where central motor command and sensation of innovation was originally studied.
So sensation of innovation is the kind of feeling that we get as a result of recruiting motor units.
So it's the thing that contributes to the increasing perception of effort as we go through a
strength training set, especially with you know, kind of heavy or moderate loads, we'd like to those
you've got other perceptions of effort from afferent feedback, but that's less relevant.
So what we're seeing then is that we increase the sensation innovation because we're increasing more
as the central mode command level.
We start to feel that as a perception that's literally what sensation of innovation means.
And when we reach the maximum tolerable limit to that, we can't really increase it any further.
And that stops us from increasing motino crew and that stops us from actually being able to kind of
continue the exercise that we're doing.
The sensation of innovation was literally studied.
And you actually sent me a study that's been done by the same lab more recently where they've
basically tested the same observation and slightly different way.
It was literally done in a strength training situation.
It was done in biceps curls, you know?
So when people said Oh no, no, the model doesn't apply to strength training, I'm like, it was
literally done initially in the strength training context.
Studies.
Well, new studies.
Yeah, not done in strength training when the actual sensation of invasion hypothesis was formed in
2012.
You know, I think if I remember correctly with a biceps girls study and the more recent one that you
sent me not so long ago, again repeated I think again an elbow flexion exercise.
So I yeah, I don't, I don't know why people are saying that.
OK, I sidetracked us.
Where were we?
We're staying on track, staying on track.
We were thinking about how are we constructing a kind of arms workout that would be better than the
kind of golden era one that you kind of started us off with.
And I was kind of just making the point that what we want is a reasonable degree of excise variety
that allows us to hit all of the MOS fibers in both the LO flexors and the LO extensors.
And you know, I think really I covered a lot of the ground when I was analysing the workout you
brought were us today.
So it's actually quite straightforward.
You can say, well, OK, you've got the Brachioridialis, you've got the Brachialis and you've got the
device.
It's Brachie.
We talked about how the Brachioradialis is going to have peak effort in the contractor position of
elbow flexion and also probably you know, with a pronated grip if you know people want to do that so
you.
Based in case anyone sort of wear brachioradialis like we're talking that sort of like elbow gap
muscle.
You don't like my description?
Well, it's not that.
It's just, I think, you know, everybody's got very, very slightly different, you know, kind of way
that things lay out.
And sometimes people can look very, very different.
I mean, I wouldn't want people to go over the idea that has to always be exactly like that.
You know, in this case, reports of people having all kinds of weird anatomical variations.
So people's, if they look, if you're looking at your arm right now and it doesn't look like that,
then don't worry too much of it.
But yeah, so top part of the excise range of motion and you know, pronating, I mean, I always say to
people, you know, elastic resistance is probably the easiest and simplest way to do that.
But again, cables, if you're running them horizontally, will generally do the same effect.
So they will generally allow you to get peak effort close to the sort of end range depending on what
your body position is relative to the cable direction.
So yeah, some kind of maybe elastic resistance loop elastic resistance around an easy bar and just
stand on the elastic resistance and you know, pull upwards and you'll get a pretty strong
brachyradialis effect.
Obviously I said before, biceps brachy probably kind of seated curl with the cables behind the back
pulling horizontally is going to be really effective for the biceps brachy.
We explained why that was.
And then brachialis is going to be a preacher curl.
And then really, if people want to go absolutely to the, I mean, obviously we're talking about a
bodybuilding kind of sort of situation.
Yeah.
This is not anything remotely related to, you know, casual lifting.
I mean, if people just want to do casual kind of strength training, then just do some hammer curls
and forget about all this other stuff.
But you know, from a purpose of like somebody who's looking to be competitive, then you would have
one of each of these curls probably.
And if things still weren't really going in the direction we wanted to, then I'll probably look at
supinations.
Now I'm guaranteeing that people will go, oh, can I just rotate the dumbbell as I'm lifting it?
No, you can't because the supination torque that you can generate is huge.
So you're going to find that is just the easiest thing in the world to do supination while you're
root, you're going to need to do a separate supination exercise.
You're going to find that you actually get really strong really quickly doing that kind of thing.
The grip guys use very light sledgehammers for this because they can literally just put tape
electrical tape of different different distances along the And then you just previous of overload as
you move your hand of R1 electrical tape kind of notch to the next or sort of strip to the next.
And you can count how many sort of electrical tape strips that you've managed to increase over time.
And you're obviously supination improves accordingly to the increased leverage that that weight has
on your wrist.
So very, very straightforward.
So that would kind of be a sort of a complete set of exercises.
How would I construct that?
Well, I think you might be able to get away with four sets three times a week, but I think if you'd
have to keep the weight relatively low and you'd probably have to be one of those people who's
diamosis fibers probably had quite a lot of difference in terms of the exercises that were training
those fibers.
If you're one of those people who's perhaps a little bit less kind of specific in terms of which
exercise does which thing, you might find that you're going to have to do full body AB and train 2
exercises on one day and two exercises on the other day.
Otherwise it's not going to work.
But, you know, I think either of those two strategies would probably make sense.
Now, I don't think you mentioned any unilateral exercises.
Oh well, I guess the supination is going to be unilateral exercise.
You have to, yeah, you have to do the supination unilaterally.
But I mean, you, you could do all of this unilaterally.
I mean, there's no reason why not to.
Yeah.
I mean for directory Arty Alice, my favorite exercise at the moment is a top partial cable curl if
you have it like a coronated cable curl.
Probably the probably the simplest way.
If you've got a decent setup, absolutely.
Yeah.
And then you can I pair that like I, So what I'll do is I'll do that obviously single arm.
And then I'll pair that with a standing behind the back cable curl single arm and I'll brace myself
against the other side of the cable station.
So I can do unilateral for both in the same station.
I've got most of my groups doing that.
I think it's a it's a great pair to bias Jackie Radias, to bias Jackie.
Yeah, definitely.
Yeah, yeah.
I mean, ultimately practicalities are going to have to take precedence over everything else.
But yeah, ultimately we're aiming for those three different positions and then the fourth big super
nation if people want to add that in.
What did you say for Brachialis?
You said preacher kill.
Preacher go Yeah.
Yeah, and how would that compare to a hammer kill?
You basically from about 70° onwards, you're probably getting to the zone where the Brachialis would
be kind of taking over.
So we kind of want to stay below that and obviously hammer curl is kind of drifting past that point.
So we kind of want to make sure that the excise is hardest below 70, ideally more around the kind of
20 or 30°.
So I tend to suggest people at preacher Curl really want to be as shallow as possible.
Yeah, and I believe you can actually do that pronated grip.
Yeah, if it's comfortable, but I don't generally find that it is too comfortable.
Yeah.
Well, not with the machine, no.
But you could.
I'm just trying to think because I used to do it that way.
I'm trying to recall how I used to do it.
Probably.
You could probably do a hammer core variation that wouldn't be too.
That's what I did.
I didn't dumbbell hammer.
You could do that.
Yeah, you could do that.
Yeah, you could.
Absolutely do the bottom partial if you wanted.
Yeah, that would definitely give you a bit more brachialis, I think.
And then repetition wise, how would this kind of change that sort of fairly standard for something
like that?
Again, it would depend on where you were going with it.
So if you were again thinking about doing this as a as an AEB routine and just having two exercises
in each workout, then you could go down a slightly higher Rep range 4 into one workout and try and
do those three times a week.
Then I think you would probably need to be very careful about your Rep ranges, need to really need
to be careful about your reps in reserve as well.
Yeah, honestly, I think because this is the way of the issue.
You finish your thought.
I was just going to say this is one of those issues you have to be.
Aware of with the elbow flexors and extensors is that of all the muscles in the body, they're
actually the most easily damaged.
And just to be clear, I know that you've got people out there, even people who are, you know, kind
of talking about sports science in this context, who will tell you they think that the elbow flexors
are easily, you know, kind of non non fatiguing muscles that they don't because they're small or
whatever.
And the opposite is that's the case.
And in fact, it's one of those situations where if you have any understanding of the fatigue
literature, you would be like, what are these people talking about?
Because in the fatigue literature, researchers literally use the elbow flexors as the muscle that
gets damaged and the quads as the muscle that is resistant to damage.
That is literally what they do because after hundreds and hundreds of studies, that is the result
that keeps coming out, that you train the quads and they recover really quickly.
You train the wise, it's back and they just get destroyed for a week.
That is just what we keep seeing, time and time and time and time.
So when people say no, no, no, I don't believe you, I'm like, well, you just haven't done the
reading then, because it's literally the sort of benchmark kind of comparison that we use for
everything.
I mean, I'm just amazed.
I said to you, I joked with you before we came on the podcast, there are basically three kind of
sureties in life, you know, death, taxes and hypertrophy.
Researchers not understanding the fatigue literature.
I mean, it's getting really silly.
You know, like just guys just go and do the reading.
It's not hard.
So anyway, so yeah, elbow flexors and extensors get really kind of damaged by exercise.
We have to be extra careful with those compared to a lot of the other muscles that you're going to
be training.
I mean, it just makes sense to actually look at the characteristics of the elbow flexors.
Anyway, like even if even if you didn't look at those high fast reach proportion, high fast reach
proportion small voluntary.
Activation deficit relative to the other muscles, you can't smash the high threshold motions because
you can't, you know, kind of in the case of the lower body muscles, you can't smash the high
threshold moting at muscles because you can't reach them.
And there's a pretty even balance of slow and fast, in the case of the elbow flexors and sensors,
you've got lots of fast, rich fibers and you can access most of them.
So you're going to get a really severe muscle damaging effect after the workout.
So honestly, this is all very, very joined up.
There's no kind of gaps in this thought process.
People are just not doing the reading.
You made a comment about repetitions if you're.
Splitting up over up like 2 days or one, yes, I think that's an astute comment to make.
And I think that's, I find that a valuable way to be thinking about repetition range.
Where I would say the easiest way to think about drips is to base it off your recoverability in the
sense that if you're training a muscle and you're doing multiple sets and you're going to be doing
it again 48 hours later, you're kind of going to be forced to do lower repetition sets.
And by law, you know, I just mean, you know, a sub sort of 10 or whatever, right?
If you're doing that twice a week or you're doing single sets, you've got liberty, you're doing
10/12/15 repetitions if you want.
So for me, I tend to gravitate towards the high repetitions if my recoverability timeline allows for
it because I just say so much time warming up.
If I'm doing multi sets, I'll do lower repetitions.
Yeah, yeah, yeah, absolutely.
I mean, I think it just comes down to practicalities really.
But again, you know, it is what it is.
So that's elbow flexors.
Should we move on to triceps?
We should cool so.
Really from?
A kind of triceps point of view, we've got kind of the medium lateral heads and we've got the long
head.
Now we talked again in the kind of analysis of the Golden Era programme about how the long head
might have the ability to get involved in dips.
And in that case, you know, you might get a really strong kind of whole triceps stimulus from the
dip exercise if you're one of those people that you know, has that ability to produce shoulder
flexion, kind of talk with the long head.
And I suspect in my case I probably was in that category because I did a lot of dips.
I got my triceps to a kind of size where they probably weren't going to get a lot bigger.
I tried to add in some kind of over extension and absolutely zero happened.
I mean, it literally did nothing for me whatsoever.
So I think chances are there are kind of people that maybe fall into that category, not necessarily
everybody, but I think there probably are people who could probably use dips and get quite a long
way down the route of training the entirety of the choices kind of group.
If you do want to kind of use single joint stuff to target different parts where you need to for
whatever, you know, for the reasons that you're not falling into that category, then obviously you
know, kind of what we've got is some interesting information regarding shoulder and elbow leverages.
Generally speaking, the long head probably has better relative leverage to the media and lateral
heads when the elbow is flexed and when the shoulder is extended.
So that's basically going to be a standing triceps extension push down rather sorry.
And then obviously if you want to train the media and lateral heads, you could do the behind the
kind of head kind of overhead triceps extension with a dumbbell and that would give you kind of two
exercises that would do medial lateral heads versus kind of long head.
Would you choose the overhead extension over?
A close grip bench?
Or are you choosing that because simply you've got chess involvement?
Yeah, I'm yeah, I'm kind.
Of assuming.
That somebody wants.
A single joint exercise for both.
You could obviously do the the narrow grip kind of bench press or something like that in the same
way that you could do the dip.
I mean, neither of those two would do that if you were in the category of people who couldn't get
along, had to work in those scenarios.
So, yeah, I mean, there's not really a lot more I think that that I would I would throw into the
mix.
You know, personally I would just do dips and I think I'd probably do everything that I could
possibly get out of triceps training for somebody who isn't in that category of having that leverage
capacity.
I would say, you know, yeah, probably something like an arrogate bench or and then a standing
triceps pushed down or alternatively, you know, the two different kind of triceps kind of exercises
a single joint.
I mean, either of those two strategies would probably do the trick.
I don't think there's really anything.
I mean there's some data suggesting that you can get a little bit out of a supernative position in
the triceps push down exercises, but generally you're going to need probably a cuff to make that
happen.
So the, you know, the kind of the requirement for equipment starts to pile up, but you know why
that's happening.
I mean, a lot of gyms have cast nowadays.
It is something I.
Often I do use out with my groups and and say look, if you can't do it, I do it.
Just do it creative, but it's supinated if someone hasn't done it.
Like it does feel quite nice if you've got the card.
It feels totally different, doesn't it?
I mean like this is the thing when I when.
I first looked at it and I was like, I'm skeptical, but there was 2 studies came out both showing
that supinated position for prices, push downs, increased activation of long head even further.
I'm like, OK, that's interesting.
And I actually went and tried it and OK, my grip strength was just about up to the up to the
challenge of doing a couple of reps before it kind of went OK, this is not happening.
But it felt totally different.
I actually my my entire kind of trisector muscle felt like it was doing something really quite
different.
In the same way that when I do supinations I actually feel my elbow flexor complex feels different
from when I do the same thing I get when I.
Do a supinated version of a pushdown.
I actually feel a completely different contraction in my triceps brachy, like the muscles trying to
do something different.
So I think the activation look locations are going to be different in that scenario.
So yeah, I think that will probably be the only kind of tweak that I would potentially consider if
somebody was really trying to go to the top tier kind of competitive level of bodybuilding.
Yeah, Yeah, I was thinking about this.
This week, and I thought because there's a lot of people talking about what do they call it, like a
minimalist program, you know, minimalist full body training and abbreviated players, that kind of
thing.
And I was thinking, you know what the key difference here between a minimalist and a maximalist more
we're talking about is maximalist is a minimalist plan is going to look for the exercise that has as
much activation of that whole muscle group as possible.
Whereas A maximalist plan doesn't really want that.
We want to pick exercises that have as much of A particular region as possible and as little of the
other regions as possible.
Where there's there's a step.
I agree with you.
But I think there's also a step that comes before the exercise selection kind of decision is made in
the context of a minimalist program, because I run a minimalist program most of the time.
But that's because I'm an old man.
So, you know, if you, if you're coming in from an old man perspective, you, you don't just have the
point of view of saying, you know, how do I capture the maximum amount of activation for the muscle
group?
You actually have to decide what muscle groups are important to you.
Absolutely, Absolutely no.
I agree.
There's a starting point.
Where you have to actually go what what's most important to me.
And then I kind of, and actually, it doesn't always come down to muscle mass because you could say
to someone, OK, well, I only want to have one quad exercise in the program.
But is it going to come down to a leg press or a or a kind of knee extension?
And somebody will go, Oh yeah, but the knee extension is the only way the erect feminine.
I'm like, yeah, but there's no way I'm going to drop a leg press out of my program.
It's not going to happen.
Yeah.
And what else are you doing in the program as well?
Like are you?
Exactly.
Have you got a good exercise in?
We actually did.
We did a.
We did a whole kind of.
A discussion where we we've constructed that that minimalist programme out of I think we came down
to 11 pressing exercise, one pulling exercise, a hamstrings curl on social media.
We didn't do that on a podcast.
Yeah, we did that on social media and we're like, yeah, I think ultimately.
That's where I start from, I start from 1-1 pull one press a leg press and A and a hamstrings curl.
That's that's the core of my my workout really now at this point.
So in this context.
Because you've answered the question, if someone wanted to do a minimalist program for harms, you're
saying for a lot of people dips for triceps may potentially be that exercise.
I would say that's probably the exercise and I would probably say a hammer curl.
Is is getting close to where you'd want to be, But I'm I'm, I'm, I'm kind of.
A bit.
Agnostic really about that.
I mean, I don't, I don't think it's definitively the, the, the, the guaranteed exercise that I would
probably program, but it's pretty close.
I mean, arguably, you know what I like?
I like it.
A dumbbell.
A supinating alternating curl because just based on the moment you are going to get good
graculatialis, yes, you do have supination.
I agree we're not challenging supination to any significant extent, but we're still going to be
getting, you know, decent vices, braculas and the alternating curl, yes, it's not a unilateral
exercise, but you know, if you get a little bit more direction.
Yeah, No, I, I to be fair, I do do that.
Because alternating.
So, yeah, no, I think that's right.
So again, it's different kind of programs for different purposes.
I mean, it depends where people are going.
I I don't like seeing arguments where people are starting from totally different perspectives, where
one person is talking about things from a competitive bodybuilding point of view, the other person's
talking about it from like a like maybe closer to my own position.
Old man kind of just needs a training program kind of point of view.
And they're, they're literally arguing with each other about what exercises the best and they're not
actually understanding that one is asking for one thing and the other is asking for totally.
Yeah.
What's the function really trying to solve that?
Yeah, I find.
Those arguments to be pretty pretty.
Kind of searching for a word that isn't really rude disappointing.
You know they're they're not able to have the empathy to understand that the other person is just
fundamentally asking for a different thing.
Yeah.
So yeah.
So just all of this all that they have for someone to ask for a different thing as well.
That's that's what I.
Find offensive when coaches assume that that the client must only ask what they want to be doing as
a coach, it's like, well, hang on, someone might actually want a maximus plan.
You don't need to just force a minimalist plan or vice versa onto yeah, I think goals.
Goals are personal.
And definitely are fundamentally, you know, kind of it's a necessity for us to respect that.
I don't think it's a good idea to go down the route of value judgement in people's goals.
Yes, I want to highlight just on that minimalist.
Maximus thing because when when we just came up with that minimalist plan there, I know that you
said dips might fit into a maximalist plan and you gave a caveat there and said not for everyone and
you gave the other options if that wasn't the case.
Yeah.
But so obviously dips are a bit of a Gray area, but our elbow flex exercise we picked and
alternating hammer curl or supinating Dumber curl, whatever that was not in our Maximus plan.
And that's the point I want to highlight.
Does it have to compromise really Exactly.
That's it.
A minimalist plan.
Involves a.
Compromise for the exercise section and a maximus plan doesn't and well, yeah, I mean a base of
understanding that I think that's an important.
Programming.
Oh yeah, I mean.
Like the absolute base level like my.
Starting point for the most minimalist plan that you can get to, which is pretty much exactly the
same as yours really.
Although I think I initially started out with a stiff like deadlift and you kind of said, well, no,
better to have a, you know, kind of seated hamstring curl.
And I think you're probably right.
So ultimately, you know, kind of seated hamstring curl like press, kind of some kind of, you know,
steeping glam press or, or kind of wide grip kind of shoulder press and maybe some kind of wide grip
pull down probably would be my personal preferences.
Now you're making huge compromises there because you've not got any direct artwork at all.
It's like you've just got no direct artwork at all in the program.
Now for me, I, I'm definitely in the category of people who can get away with that because my kind
of arms have got better leverage than my torso.
So I, I kind of end up using my arms a lot anyway to do anything.
I've been an orangutan really.
So I kind of, that is definitely not a huge problem for me, but you know, obviously for some people
that would be a horrendous issue and they would end up, you know, kind of not really getting a very
good arms stimulus at all from that kind of programme.
So it comes down to limiting factors.
You know, you're doing a bench press or you're doing a pull or you're doing whatever movement you're
doing.
You know, are you limited by your biceps and triceps in that situation?
If you are, then OK, fine, it probably is giving you a decent arms.
If you're not, then it's not.
When I say decent, I mean decent.
I don't mean competitive bodybuilding.
I mean it's again with layers here.
Like even if you're the limiting fact, even if you're biceps or tries with the limiting factor in a
in a multi tone movement, then you're still not getting the activation you would get in a single.
There's still a compromise.
There's muscle mass.
Excess in there that.
You don't need.
So like there's and There's the only way to look at it though, because you can't.
It doesn't.
Work, what we're saying is start from the the baseline is what is the most effective program
possible for every single muscle group, every single muscle region and then we can work backwards
from there.
And we're not throwing a shame in someone who does work backwards from there.
It's very few people I would give that Maximus program to, right?
And my my program is by the way, all from.
That as you can get.
Exactly.
That's fine.
It's.
Not a moral judgement if someone's making compromises.
And it doesn't work to do it the other way.
You can't start from minimum.
And then?
Build up Like To what point are you built like it's just a where you're starting without the
information that you need to make the?
Kind of to to make the program work.
You know, I think there's a lot of people out there who just start with what they like, how they
like to program.
They're like, this is how I like to program.
Then they start defending why they think that program is the best for everybody.
And they come out with all kinds of silly statements like, oh, you could even train for some sport
by doing my strength training and just doing the sport.
And they come out with absolutely ridiculous statements like that.
This one program that I do is the program for every.
Single person, Yeah, That's not a marketing exercise at all.
No, no, no.
No, it's not, you know, so, but you know, ultimately the, the thing we're saying here is that, you
know, every kind of program is going to start with the goal of the program.
And then you make decisions of what you want to include based on what that goal is.
And you've got a balance between how many exercises you want to do and how much time you want to
spend in the gym and what your kind of budget is for, you know, kind of energy and effort and all
that kind of thing.
And you'll find that it goes down as you get older.
You can't go in the gym and do 30 exercises.
It's not going to happen at the point when you get to my age.
So yeah, I mean, I think that's that's that's where we're at.
But the purpose of today's conversation was to try and give people this kind of absolute top tier,
maximum possible, you know, every single exercise that they could really benefit from.
And I think we've probably achieved that in terms of sets and reps and stuff on the triceps, because
we did this for biceps.
Just to reinforce again, we've got the same problem with the triceps you have of the biceps.
They are easily damaged.
They are high kind of fast reach proportion.
They do have a pretty small deficit to monetary activation compared to the big lower body muscles,
although not quite as bad as the biceps brachia.
I don't think.
So ultimately I would be careful on that front.
I wouldn't program, you know, lots and lots of sets and reps, but the chances are you're probably
only going to need 2 exercises for triceps anyway, so it's not so much a big deal as it would be for
the elbow flexors to try and capture absolutely everything.
Yeah yeah, yeah.
So potentially 2.
Sets of each depending on how like.
If there's a kind of lap for that.
Person other stuff you want to do.
I mean like if you've got pressing stuff in your routine.
Anyway, then maybe some of that starts to dial back a little bit.
Yeah, this is true.
Yeah, OK.
I need.
To ask you one question, biceps peak, is there anything anyone can do?
It's a hot topic, I'm sure fib ever and there's all kinds of ideas people throw around how to build
the biases.
Peak, I say the short and long hair and this and the other.
Is there anything to any of that?
Well, as I say, I think.
The important thing to start with is that everybody's kind of sort of anatomy is going to be very
slightly different.
And So what I would do is I would try and establish information.
So pick one of these four exercises out of the F4 that we've given for different parts of the OAFX
complex and put it first in the workout.
Do a couple of sets of it and do it unilaterally.
Do other stuff kind of later on and do that for a couple of months and see what the shape changes
look like.
And then if it doesn't go in the shape that you're looking for, try one of the others.
And so ultimately, though, there's not really anything different they can do than what we've just
said.
Because we've just given them an outline.
Those are the four options that you've got.
Those are the four options that are.
Training fundamentally different parts of the Alba Flex complex.
So basically, those are your four opportunities to make a change.
If somebody tries to sell you doing something else, then they're on thin ice really in terms of
their justifications for what's happening.
Those are the definitive 4 directions that you can go in for training different parts of the LFX
complex.
So literally pick one and try it and see what the shape changes look like after a couple of months.
And if it doesn't go in the direction you wanted to, try one of the others.
But I'm not going to come out and say no definitively.
This is the one of the four that you want to do because I think that different people are going to
respond slightly differently now.
Somebody who's got, you know, really like extensive experience in, you know, kind of anatomy and
there's maybe even gone as far as doing cadaver dissections and stuff like that.
Maybe have a better insight into that than I do.
But from a point of view of where I'm sitting, just understanding, you know, the literature, I don't
think I've got the ability to say it's definitively this one, this one or this one.
I think I would just say to people, try one and see what happens.
I mean again, if you Max out, I mean Max.
I'm using that word loosely, but if you develop each alloy flexor as much as possible, then yeah,
that would honestly be if somebody's like that determined.
To to to looks Max, then I would say look, just do all four in the way that I've described either
like full body three times a week with each exercise being done for one set of lower repetitions
around the sort of five to seven zone, you know, RIP in reserve and be careful.
Manage fatigue.
And then or if you can't do that, then full body AB and do two and two and see how that goes.
But yeah, I think honestly, those Forex eyes are probably going to kind of give you 99.9% of
anything you could possibly get from the elbow flexors.
Yeah, great.
There we go, minimalist.
And Maximus plan for developing arms.
Anything you want to finish with or did we nail it all there?
No, I think we're done.
I think we've covered.
Everything OK?
Well, if you guys enjoy this, let us.
Know, maybe we'll do it for another muscle group, I don't know.
But give me some feedback.
And if there are obviously topics and questions and stuff you guys do want us to cover, by all means
let us know.
I'm checking my DMS intermittently now so you can send me a message.
I'd say I'm probably gonna stop next week, who knows, but otherwise, send us a message.
Anyway, thank you guys, and hopefully you'll join us again next week for another episode.