Episode: 056 Most deloads are too short
URL: https://open.spotify.com/episode/09MGDlsuFXULtBXfczmJ5Y
Published: 2026-06-15
================================================================================

Welcome back to another episode of Hypertrophy Past and Present.
Now, Chris, last week you told me off.
You didn't tell me off.
You made a joke about how every week I ask you how you're doing.
The one week you got something to say.
I didn't ask you.
So here we are.
How are you doing today?
I'm recovering from flu so I'm OK now.
I wasn't OK a couple of days ago, but I'm I'm definitely getting better now.
So yes, thank you.
OK, you do sound a bit off speaking.
It's not too much work you avoid.
Your throat isn't too sore.
No.
OK.
No, OK, I shall mute myself if I start coughing, but other than that I'll be all right.
Honey and coffee for coffee.
I mean, you're not going to go make a coffee now, but if anyone is listening to this and you have a
cough hit pause.
Go make yourself a honey, a honey, go make yourself a coffee, put some honey in it and thank me
later.
So our topic today, we are going to be chatting all things deloads.
Now this is a topical topic in that there's been a lot of people online talking about this.
There's been a few videos that have been researching of, you know, some conversations around
deloading and when to do a deload.
And we thought, hey, why not have a whole conversation about it.
So I'm sure a lot of people listen to this.
We'll have seen some of those videos.
I don't think it's any secret and we're going to unpack physiologically why do a deload, what's
happening and how you can implement it if you need to.
Do you need to?
Why would you do it?
And to launch into the conversation, I'm going to introduce you to a plan from one of the people
having this conversation, which is the great Dorian Yates.
And we have covered 1 of Dorian's plans before.
And the plan we covered in the past was a very early plan of Dorian.
So it was, oh geez, I don't know, 20 episodes ago is quite a while ago, maybe not quite that long,
but it's a while ago.
And we looked at the 1st plan that he published or he recorded in his, in his training log.
So what's cool about Dorian, if you guys don't know this is he recorded like all of his training and
training logs.
You can see how his split changed, how his exercises changed.
He would record how he's feeling on the day if he made an adjustment to an exercise, why he made it
when he changed the, the particular workouts.
It's pretty cool stuff.
And so we can see the evolution of how his routines changed over time.
And that includes how they changed from when he was pre enhancement to post enhancement, which is
quite an interesting observation as well.
So the first plan we've talked about was a pre enhancement plan of Dorians and now we're gonna look
at one of his post enhancement plans.
So buckle in because there is a fair bit here to cover.
So this was a one of his Olympia plans when he was winning the Olympia and obviously on anabolics
and we've got a four day routine, so 4 different days.
So bear with me, you need to focus.
There's a lot here.
So day one was shoulders and triceps.
Day 2 was back and rear delts.
But as part of his back work, he had some hamstring work in there.
So he had back extension he had and he had deadlift.
So day 2's back, rear delts and hamstrings.
And then the next workout was chest and biceps and the final workout was legs.
So it was cods, it was calves and it was hamstrings again.
So four day split and I'm just gonna read through the exercises we had on each day and then I'll
make a couple of notes towards well after I've done that.
So for our shoulders and triceps today we had a dumbbell press or miss or a Smith machine behind the
neck press.
We had seated or standing left array.
So again, he, you know, he would change some of these variations.
Sometimes he had a cable latcher raised with a single arm, the Nautilus triceps extension cable
pressed down and then he did some ABS.
So he did crunches and he did reverse crunches on our back.
Great Dalton Ham's day.
We had the Nautilus pullover.
Of course, the pullover, everyone knows Doreen for the pullover.
We had chin UPS.
We had the Yates row, which I believe, correct me if I'm wrong, Chris, if you know, I think this was
like a supinated semi bent over barbell row.
Then we had the hammer row, a bent over lateral or a redoubt machine barbell shrug.
So vertical barbell shrug, back extensions and then deadlifts.
And for our chest and bicep stay, we had a Smith machine decline bench, an incline bench, dumbbell
flies and then incline or concentration curls, barbell curl and then hammer curl.
So a lot of curling going on.
And for our final workout, our lower body routine, we had leg extensions, leg press or Smith machine
squats, hack squats, leg curls, which I assume is lying leg curls.
We also had seated leg curls, standing leg curls, stiff leg deadlifts, standing calf raise, and
seated calf raise.
So a long list of exercises.
Now almost all these exercises were done for somewhere between 6:00 and 10:00 repetitions.
Couple of exceptions to that, but generally 6 to 10 and they were almost all done for one set to
failure.
There was a couple of warm up sets and you know, as people sort of comment when it comes to Dorian's
stuff, some of those warm up sets probably had some stimulating repetitions in them if you watch
videos of him training.
But generally speaking, he would do one work set.
And some of those work sets involved extended sets.
So you might have done like a drop set or a triple drop set or forced repetitions, and that sort of
varied from exercise to exercise.
But in general, we're talking one set done to failure, 6:00 to 8:00-ish, six to 10 repetitions for
most of these exercises.
It's quite a list.
What are your initial thoughts?
So yeah, there's so much to talk about here and probably aren't going to get all the way through it
and actually talk about the load to the end as well and still have the voice.
Otherwise, it's just a topic of of Dorian's plan.
Yeah.
But obviously I think there will be some repetition of.
I mean, obviously it's, it's kind of designed as a body part split really.
But the exercise selection does mean that there will be a little bit of crossover on especially the
pressing stuff, I think.
So initially when I looked at it, I was like, OK, so it's a body part split except hamstrings get,
you know, kind of two, two sessions a week.
But that's not really true because you can kind of see that there is a press, you know, in the in
the first workout that probably will have had some kind of chest work in there as well.
And then similarly on the chest day when you've got presses there, you're going to have triceps and,
and kind of shoulders there.
So that is kind of twice a week.
And arguably, you know, when you're looking at the back work, there's probably not a high degree of
biceps stimulus, but there will be some biceps fibres getting drained there.
So arguably it's kind of maybe just lats and traps maybe that don't get trained, you know, twice a
week.
I don't know, without kind of really going through exercise, it's really tough.
And obviously different people's leverages will count in different ways.
I mean, anytime there's a pressing exercise in a programme, I automatically go, well, that's my
triceps day.
I mean that just that would be straight away from me.
Different people have different averages.
I mean, even the pullover, you know, that's challenging as well.
Like what's that?
Is that purely going to be back?
Is it going to be coastal pack?
Is it going to be like, you know, that is a bit of a wild card as well, hey.
So, so really with the excise selection, it doesn't really count as a pure body part split, but it's
designed that way, which obviously is not great.
Otherwise, you kind of end up training maybe certain portions of a muscle twice a week, which is
moving in the right direction, but we're still not really where we want to be, which would be say
three times.
But anyway, that's the overall framework.
In terms of exercise, well, no, OK, excise selection and the idea of kind of mainly doing single
sets.
What's interesting is that he's tending to pick multiple exercises for the same muscle and do single
sets of them rather than doing multiple sets of the same exercise.
That's really interesting.
Even though this is a full on golden era plan, which is way off the end of the introduction of
anabolic state, we're still seeing, we're still, yeah, we're still seeing this idea of doing
multiple exercises for the same muscle.
So you know, we've got, we've got a, we've got a press behind the neck followed by a lateral raise
followed by a secondary lateral raise.
Interestingly there the second lateral raise is, is a unilateral variation, which is one of the kind
of patterns that we've talked about quite a lot doing the mote, doing the the two arm variation
followed by a single arm variation.
The same thing with high level of recruitment.
Which is what he did in the first routine of his that we covered.
So this is really cool.
That stayed so, so this is really interesting.
So we've got this tendency to do multiple exercises rather than doing the same exercise and do
multiple sets, however, and the same thing happens actually with triceps extensions in that same
workout.
What's interesting though is that not all of those exercises are well chosen in order to move
activation around.
Sometimes it's like like the the curl example.
So you you mentioned there's a lot of curls in the program, basically 3 curls, the same curl.
I mean, there's no real difference that honestly, you know, if you want to actually move activation
around the different parts of the elbow flexors, you would pick three totally different curls from
the one that he's picked there.
Yeah, Yeah.
I mean, obviously there's some difference in terms of supination and neutral, but you know he's got,
he doesn't have any cables in that day.
There's minimal difference in the strength curve.
So the point in the elbow flexion range of motion where the peak effort is located, there's minimal
difference there and there's minimal difference in shoulder position.
So the reality is that 2 of the major factors, OK, I, I, I grant you that risk supination is going
to make a difference, but two of the major factors are not being varied.
So it really kind of ends up being three kind of curls that are the same.
So even though the kind of basic idea of doing multiple exercises of signal search is there, which
is cool, is not actually kind of maximizing the benefit that he could get out of that as a.
Program it's not maximizing.
I would play devil's advocate and say that it's still even if you don't vary the exercise to a
significant enough degree to change regional activation, I would say it's still a better approach
because he is a psychological component there.
See, this is interesting because I was asked.
I was asked by.
I always get I get this question almost every single week I was asked by people on my Instagram
questions about they don't I don't kind of get the the blunt kind of question of what should I do as
a PhD thesis, but it's it's close enough.
It's like people ask me the basic they're asking me how to design a study to do for their PhD and I
keep pushing them towards testing Marcoras psychobiological model of fatigue.
This what you just suggested is something that's been kind of kicking around in my head for a while,
which is wouldn't it be really cool to construct an experiment to test whether or not we get more
repetitions in How would you even construct it, though?
So what I'm getting at is this how does how does doing?
Oh, I know how you would do it.
So yeah.
So what you would do is you would ask someone to, you would, you would bring them into the gym and
you would test their 10 red Max and then you would ask them to come back three days later.
And you would.
So you'd have a group of maybe 20 people and half of them you would ask them to do 3 days later
you'd ask them to come back and do a single set again and try and get as many reps as possible with
the same weight that they just did for the Temera Max.
The other group, you would ask them to come back and do three sets to failure and you would record
the first.
You would record the first.
You called the reps for the first set of that three and then three days after that you'd switch to
the 10 and the 10 around.
So the half would then come back and then do the same thing the other way around.
So what we'd have is you'd have three gym visits.
You'd have a come in for the first visit and they'd test their Temera Max come in for the second
visit and half of the group would do a single set.
The other half would do three sets and then they come back three days later and they do the
opposite.
So the group that did the single set would do 3 and the group, the three sets would do one.
And then you would aggregate the results.
You'd say, does it make a difference if you know that you've got two more sets to do?
Does it make a difference to your ability to do maximum number of reps on your first set?
Now my experience as it does, my experience is that if I know that I've got three sets, my first set
is not as good as if I go in there, I've only got one set.
I just my brain just functions differently in that moment.
That's certainly my observation with clients.
Like across the board, I see that time and time and time again with clients.
Really interesting to see that actually shows through in a in a study.
So yeah, that would be the idea that the brain is actually thinking about the work it has to do next
and is increasing your effort perception to stop you basically from working too hard too early.
Yeah.
So that that was that was really the the majority of observations.
I mean, I can make comments on excise selection, but I don't think it really means very much.
I mean, I think really my main observations are just around the programme structure, the frequency
of muscle training, I guess is worth commenting on.
I mean, in that regard, I mean, ultimately one of the great unknowns that we're always dealing with
when we talk about golden era programmes is why bodybuilders moved in that direction after the start
of anabolic usage.
And really the only kind of hints that we've got in the literature are because of injury risks.
You know, and it could be simply that injury risk increasing as a result of anabolic usage causes
people to train in different ways.
It causes them to maybe train muscles less frequently because the underlying maybe tendon structures
can't keep pace the because of the way that anabolics work.
We've done our whole podcast on this because the way the anabolics interfere with tendon
adaptations, it could be a case that they require more time to stabilise.
I don't know what the right word would be because what I've seen in the tendon literature associated
with anabolics is that they just don't actually adapt, you know, So maybe this tendency to lower
frequency of muscle training is, is a response to reduced injury risk as in not reduced injury risk
every trying to reduce the chance of an injury because of the increased injury risk as educated with
anabolic.
I don't know.
I mean, obviously when anabolics are being used the atrophy is less of an issue and a lot to like.
Poetry that's being experienced is actually purely duty on the work.
I mean, it's got nothing to do with the straight.
Well, look, I think that's an important point we need to make.
So there's a few things on this plan I really like and I do want to get to them in a moment.
But as you've identified, he's doing single sets, right?
And so if you're doing single sets and you're doing it once a week, we're saying that any fibres
that are or motor units, whatever language you want to use, because there's a whole semantics
argument about this at the moment.
Any motor units that are uniquely used in that exercise for a single set, realistically we would
expect that those mode units aren't going to see net growth over the course of that week, right?
But he's doing a single set and he's enhanced.
And so, you know, I don't know with what degree of confidence we can say this, but presumably
there's going to be reduction, muscle protein breakdown, reduction and atrophy that for that for
someone who's enhanced that single set may still lead to net hypertrophy from a a training stimulus
because it's reduction in muscle protein breakdown.
But you're just not never going to see that with a natural, yeah.
Yeah, I mean that's totally valid point, so.
I love these long pauses, so I know there's going to be something good that's going to come at the
other end.
It's going to be something that's going to just dash my entire worldview.
That's OK, I'm here for it.
The reality is that I'm, I'm still recovering from flu and my brain is trying to do too many things
at once.
I'm just trying to connect dots.
And I think probably there's just too many loose ends at the moment for me to be confident in, in,
in saying, in drawing any conclusions I can.
I can see something there that's interesting and I think there's an insight I'm just not sure I can
articulate in my current state.
OK, let me think about it.
Let me think about it.
I think there's there's something there, there's something there that's worth thinking about.
I'm not sure what the answer is though.
But yeah, no, you're absolutely right.
The, the, the maintenance literature is, is very, very clear.
And this programme does seem to violate that to a certain degree, again, in an unexpected way,
because so many of the Golden Air programs are off the other end of the spectrum where they just got
a billion sets and you kind of just get used to the fact that there's just garbage in there.
Well, that's interesting because if you look at this program and you said like, you know, you said,
OK, excise selection, some stuff there maybe could be intrigued or whatever, but arguably excise
selection's not bad.
Like we're kind of hitting most.
Things between?
Well, it's not bad.
No, not at all.
And so you could say, well, let's look at this plan as it's written with all these exercises hitting
most scenes pretty well.
And to make this work for Natty, we need to add probably like 4 sets to every single exercise.
Or you could just restructure it and just do it.
I know.
But if you kept it as is, if you kept it as is, for it to actually be something that realistically
is going to work, you would need to be adding multiple sets as is when it's done once a week and
then you're going to run into this recovery issue.
So it's just interesting, I think in my mind that all, you know, we talk about gear and anabolics
and it's like, oh, you know, those guys can do so much volume and you know, people think they need
more volume.
And what about, and it's like, well, we when we look at a plan like this, a person who needs more
volume for this work is going to be the natty.
So actually what you end up saying is that the training doesn't really seem to matter if somebody's
on anabolics.
Yeah.
And the question would be well.
The question really is what actually is the training doing?
If somebody's on sufficient amounts of anabolic, does actually the training add anything?
And I think that's definitely a moot point.
And I think that a large part of that answer would come down to to what extent is muscle protein
drag down mitigated with anabolic use?
Because if there's just like basically negligible atrophy that's occurring, yeah, then anything you
do is gonna have some benefit to an extent.
Yeah.
Now there's, there are things here I'm looking at and I'm like, hey, I really like that.
So for example, most of these repetitions, there's a, a bit of, I guess flexibility here, like
almost everything is done for about 6 to 10, five to 10.
You know, some exercises are going down to 5 and I think that's a really good Rep range.
And the fact that the lower body stuff generally done a slightly higher repetitions 8 to 10, the
calf stuff done for 15, I think that's intuitive.
Not because calves need higher reps because they'll, you know, slow twitch or whatever people will
say.
But just from a loading standpoint, I think this makes sense.
Like imagine Dorian trying to do 5 repetitions on a calf raise.
Like good luck, you don't have enough plates in the world.
So I think the repetition range makes a lot of sense. 5 to 8, you know, really mitigating sort of
excess fatigue.
That's not necessary.
You know, the, the work to the the stimulus to work kind of ratio is, is really good here stimulus
to fatigue.
Now, in addition to that, something that I didn't know until we looked at this program today is the
way he was programming drop sets and he was doing his Tri.
Not that he did these on all the exercises, but the ones that he did do them on, he would do a set
of five, drop it, let the load and then do another set of five, reduce the load again and do another
set of five.
Which if you guys have listened to our drop set video, video episode, that's the way that I would be
looking at playing with drop sets.
If I was gonna use drop sets and, and every now and then when I do pregnant myself, that's how I use
them.
Now, arguably I would add a little bit of a rest between those drops, but I think the five is 4 to 5
repetitions is the perfect number if you're gonna do drop sets in my opinion.
So he's doing those really intelligently.
He's doing the repetition range intelligently, he's doing the single set stuff intelligently and
obviously the anabolics are influencing that.
And then, you know, excise selection, you know, I guess some of that makes a lot of sense.
So All in all, there's a lot here that I actually think is quite intelligently done.
And you know, you talked about the single limb stuff after some of the bilateral stuff that's really
intelligent as well.
So, you know, if we if if we take out the liberties that the anabolics are allowing for, then it it
has the makings of an intelligent plan.
It just doesn't work for Natty.
Indeed.
And an interesting observation that segues into our next part of the conversation is, do you think
that this program would actually cause accumulated fatigue in any given muscle?
I think the hams would be the one that would be possible.
So because he's got, what if we got 1234 one and four sets of up to 10 repetitions on one day and
then we've got hams again, what, 4-5 days later?
We've got 1:00-ish.
Oh, no, no, no, it's only.
Recoverable volume is going to be on on 2 day a week.
Plans is going to be 5 sets per session of moderate loads.
71 yes, but in three days time he's doing.
So on the on the.
Tuesday he did his back day and that had hams and then on the Saturday was his hams day, his late
day.
So we've got Sunday, Monday off.
So we've got four, what was it, 12344 set of hams set to 10 done a failure on the, let's say
Saturday and then Sunday off, Monday off and we got Tuesday hams again.
I think that that's.
Going to push a significant number of people if you reckon.
I think hamstrings is definitely a muscle group that I wouldn't want to tempt fate with.
But technically the data we've got is 2 * a week.
You can do four or five sets and you're OK.
It's not going to be accumulating fatigue like, but he's not evenly.
Spread out.
That's my point.
He's not doing it on the Wednesday.
If he's on the Wednesday, sure.
The fact he's going to choose them.
Oh, that's.
You know that's.
That's 48 hours off.
It's not a lot, but.
Over the whole week it still ends up in the same place.
It just it's not the very clever place.
True.
OK.
OK.
OK.
So what you're OK.
So you're seeing from the perspective of I'm just talking about over.
The course of the training program so if you're talking about doing 6 weeks and saying at the end of
that six weeks have I accumulated any fatigue and might be you haven't you just.
Positioned you.
Just positioned your workout in a silly place that you ended up doing that workout in, you know,
with a little bit of residual fatigue.
So it's less effective.
But by the end of the week, you're still caught up because all the cumulative fatigue does is just
move the day that you didn't recover to after the next workout.
Yeah, no.
So that's a really good point.
So that back day, he might not be getting everything he could of out of his hamstrings on that day.
And that was the way I was looking at it.
Yeah, but he's not stimulating everything.
Yeah.
You're saying that might.
Be true, but he's still going to recover by the end of the week for the next late day.
Yeah, yeah, absolutely.
So yes, accumulated fatigue wise, I agree with you that I mean we're we're talking five sets over
the entire week and that's that's the muscle which is most toppy here in this whole plan.
So in terms of week on, week on, there's absolutely nothing there that should be an issue.
Which is what we're going to talk about next.
Yes, deloading.
So so to your point, we would look at a plan like this and think this probably never needs deload.
Exactly.
I mean, that was kind of what I was thinking when you decided to lead with the programme.
I was like, this is a programme that's not going to need a deload.
Because I thought when you said we're going to talk about a golden era programme, I was like, oh,
fantastic.
Because then I can basically say, well, anybody doing this programme is going to need a deload.
And I'm like, well, OK, we've got a programme that's a golden era programme and it doesn't need the
deload.
So OK, that's shot my original idea in the foot.
So yeah, as you said, people are talking about deloads at the moment.
So before we even start talking about deloads, I just want to make a couple of things really really
clear.
Firstly, there is a big difference between planning to take AD load and deciding on a particular
week that you want a deload.
So one is planned and the other one is reactionary.
It's like saying, OK, I'm reacting to my circumstances.
I've decided I'm going to take a deload because I feel really, really fatigued.
OK, fine.
So planned deload is what we are talking about today.
We're not talking about deciding to take a deload on a particular week because you feel fatigued.
That's obviously totally and utterly appropriate.
Everyone's done that.
Everyone has times when they decide that a deal is a good idea.
That's not really what we're talking about today.
So.
We're talking about planning to take a deal out after a particular training block.
So the second thing to just mention is that just training hard.
So what I every time I see this conversation happening on social media, people go, oh, if you're
training hard, you're going to need to deal out.
OK, let's just let's just kill that straight away, OK, Because how hard your training is related to
effort.
Effort is basically going to be how much central motor command you are sending to the muscle in the
moment of your last couple of repetitions of the set you're doing.
So training hard refers to effort.
Effort refers to in the context of strength training, what we're talking about now first to
producing a high level of central motor command to the muscle that you're working.
You can absolutely produce really high levels of central motor command for very short period of time
and not have any post workout fatigue at all.
So training hard has got nothing to do with requiring A deload.
I mean very hard is essentially.
You do this 10 more times.
I could say this 10 more times and people will just carry on doing this all across the Internet.
Or if you're training hard then you need a deload.
I'm like literally talking nonsense.
Hard refers to effort.
Effort can be really high and still have no post workout fatigue.
So that's that's not a thing.
So I mean.
You'd be.
You'd be better off swapping the word hard for silly if you're if you're training silly, you'd need
a a dealer very, very good.
Point yeah, you're training silly.
So you can absolutely produce really high levels of effort and still not have post work appetite at
all.
That alone accumulated post work appetite.
To that point.
If you are doing a program like the one we just reviewed, or if you're doing a program which is more
sensible but still has good exercise selection and like you know, three times a week for body, you
know, a good mix of exercises, but single sets.
So you're doing single sets.
Maybe it's an A, a, A program, maybe it's an A/B, A/B, A/B program, doesn't really matter and you're
doing single sets.
There's really almost no chance that you're going to accumulate any posterior fatigue and therefore
you're not actually going to need to plan a de load at all.
You start pushing the numbers up two and three sets per excise and you're going to start bumping up
against the top of that.
If you go beyond that, then probably you are basically going to end up needing a deal.
It all comes back to how much you're actually doing and ultimately to a certain extent your kind of
susceptibility to muscle damage and what excise selection you're doing.
And then of course, you can add on to that.
If you start doing other stuff like really long, slow eccentric phases and, you know, kind of
lengthen partials or, you know, anything like that, then OK, you're going to start pushing up the
risk of accumulating fatigue as well.
So the structure of the programme is going to kind of determine whether or not you're going to find
yourself in the situation where you want to take a deload.
But looking at it from the beginning of the programme, if you're planning on taking a deload, that
implies that you know you are going to be accumulating fatigue, which is not a very good idea.
So obviously, as we know, if you accumulate fatigue, then you're going into the next workout in a
fatigue state.
And that means you're going to therefore have a lower hypertrophy stimulus because either your
recruitment is going to be lower or your mechanical tension is going to be lower due to calcium I'm
related T mechanisms or both.
And so you actually ending up in a worse state than you would be if you'd not allowed yourself to
get fatigued in the 1st place.
So that's all the kind of preamble I wanted to kind of get out of the way to start with, which is
just kind of addressing some of the really big misconceptions that we see about why deloads will be
programmed in the 1st place.
And I guess just coming back to that first one, it's just the one I keep seeing everybody repeating
all the time.
It's like training hard, you need to deload.
I'm like just just stop because that is non scientific nonsense.
It really is.
But then the other stuff obviously also run out.
So as we've discovered, there's nothing in this plan from Dorian that would cause accumulation of
fatigue, which but hang on, I want to make a point there because I think that's really interesting
because when we look at the other golden era plans, there always is almost always right.
And so you've made the point of, you know, well what what are the drugs doing?
What's the training doing?
Well, when I look at those other plans that are doing endless sets, that's a question I would have
is what?
What is the training doing?
Because there must surely be so much accumulative fatigue at that point, the training is just simply
not going to allow them to access the muscle fibers.
You would expect that they need to be hypertrophying.
So at that point, I can see that is your training doing a lot, Maybe not.
Interestingly, when you look at this plan and there's no potential for fatigue to accumulate, you
could actually make the argument this would potentially be a better way to train for someone who's
enhanced than the silly massive amounts of volume that we see people doing.
Because assuming that we're not atrophying the hypertrophy that's occurred from this single set,
there's nothing that's going to inhibit that from working week on, on additional weeks.
You know, there's no fatigue that's going to stop him accessing those modes.
Yeah, you kind of you're.
Kind of switching to an athletic neural adaptation kind of model where you can kind of just you can
do your neural adaptations for athletes and they stay with you forever.
So you can kind of do them for a bit and then stop and then do them for a bit and then stop.
You can do them once a week if you want, or once every two weeks.
Yeah.
I mean, basically you're kind of in that very lucky position where you can just kind of dip in doing
the training and then stop and, and, and don't worry about it going anywhere.
And and really.
That was kind of one of the things that's been buzzing around in my head about this deloads idea is
like, you know, is, is the deload idea again, something that's come out of the anabolic usage area
where it is actually being taken for injury risk prevention reasons related to tendons and stuff
like that.
It's nothing to do with the fact that the, the muscle needs it.
I mean, like, OK, fine.
In some of the golden era programmes, you look at it and go, you'd, you would immediately look at
the guy doing the programme and just immediately tell them to take a deal out because they're doing
such a silly programme.
But like a month.
Deload in some of these cases like.
But in the case of this program, you'd be like, what, what?
What do you need to deal out for?
And then and.
I don't know.
If Dorian did deal loads, I haven't looked into that.
So obviously, and you know, we don't, we don't normally talk about, you know, people by name, but
we're not saying anything bad here specifically around Dorian.
Dorian has been talking about deal loads on there's some podcasts that he's been on and and he's not
saying, hey, this is how I did them.
He's saying that if a kid comes to me and you know, they look like they need a deal load, they're
not recovering, they're not progressing.
This is how.
Do, I mean, everybody would tell them to take a deal?
Yeah, I mean.
Yeah, I think the.
The the issue here is we're trying to understand.
You know where the?
Deloads kind of popularity, I'm not going to say where the concept of deload comes from, because
that's coming.
It comes from, you know, kind of periodisation, but where the popularity of deloads comes from in,
in, in bodybuilding, you know, and I think obviously you can kind of see a lot of the golden
aeroplanes being super high volume.
They're naturally going to people naturally going to want to take a deal out downtime just because
they're sick of training.
In the silver.
Era, we've touched on this in the past, the way they used deloads and they didn't call and deloads
but just took time off was after a competition.
And that makes a lot of sense when you look at what they were doing in the lead up to that
competition.
Because generally they would double or even triple their volume and use that as a way to get into
conditioned states.
And they'll do that for usually about a month or so before the competition or at least a couple of
weeks.
And then they'll talk about, OK, we've done, you know, three times a day training six days a week
for two or three weeks.
And now we take a full one or two weeks off.
And that as far as I'm aware, that's really the only time they're talking about deloading is after
these silly like very high volumes leading into the competition, not for hypertrophy purposes, but
just to get lean.
Yeah.
So.
Obviously that will.
Then flow through into the old era and people will probably carry on, you know, doing that, taking
breaks after competitions and what have you.
But what we're really kind of getting at here is this idea of having a 5 or 6 week training period
and then taking a couple of weeks.
Yeah, so.
I don't know when that started.
Why did that become a thing?
Because it's not a Silver era thing.
No.
And that's what I was saying.
Is it an anabolics thing?
Is it because like there's that tendency to just because, because the risk of losing muscle is low
once underwater, it's coming, the risk of using losing muscle is low.
So the question then is, you know?
Because the.
Risk of losing a benefit is low.
You then have to say well, OK, fine, but what's the what is the actual benefit being provided?
Well, if the program doesn't require a deload and OK, many of the Golden Air programs probably did
require deloads so that that doesn't probably valid all the time.
But if we're saying that, you know, it's happening irrespective of whether the programme required a
deload or not because it's deloading anyway, is that because it provides an yet another break for
the connective tissues so that they're not kind of being put to risk or time the injury risk goes
down?
So I think, I think there's, you know.
I think it's.
Important to recognise that.
So just try and phrase this as carefully as I can.
So a lot of the time when I'm talking about strength training programming and how to program it in
the best way for say hi, poetry, for example, is what we're talking about here.
Then I will be very critical of the popular routines of the golden era and post golden era, I guess,
and I'll point out that they, they don't really make any sense for a, for a natural lifter.
And then I'll walk through how the Physiology actually works and what it points to.
And you end up basically describing a silver era programme, more or less.
So having said that, having said that, it does not mean it does not mean that the golden era
programmes are, are just nonsense.
It doesn't mean they're nonsense.
It may just mean that they're optimizing for a different thing.
That's the important thing here and I'm not guaranteeing them that's case, but I think it's
definitely worth considering that the programs are trying to achieve a different purpose, which is
once the actual kind of the meaning of hypertrophy is easy compared to a natural lifter.
Bodybuilding using anabolics is going to find hypertrophy actually just appears without having to do
anything.
If that is then not the problem anymore, what are you now optimising your training for?
And so you naturally start to look at, well, OK, well, what are the downsides of other lights?
Well, you end up with really, really, really kind of problematic tendons.
OK, well, is the training then trying to optimise for avoiding problems related to injury risk?
I don't know.
I I think the research is pretty limited around that.
And some of that won't even be.
Necessarily a rational decision, like I don't know that necessarily.
You look at some of these plans and if you talk to the bodybuilders, I'd say, yes, we did that
because of this.
It'd be this worked.
This is what produced athletes who didn't get injured and who won competitions.
And so we did that.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
And I think.
That's that's, that's the important thing.
You know, for all the amount of kind of criticism I I send in that direct in send in the direction
of those programs.
The criticism is on the basis that I am always thinking about constructing routines for a natural
lifter.
I don't have the data to be able to construct a perfect programme for a a lifter on anabolics taking
into account all of the variables.
Well, I mean injury risk as well as because if you took injury risk of the table, I would just
program for anabolics the same way I would program for non anabolic users.
And that's why I'm coming to the conclusion that the only variable that's changing is the injury
risk factor.
And then if I look at the data, the injury risk is highest for tendon related problems.
So is that then the reason why D loads become kind of ingrained in bodybuilding culture at that
point as well?
Because they weren't there in the silver era except, as you say, post competition.
But then in the kind of maybe late golden era, early kind of post golden era, you end up starting to
see D loads just appearing all the time.
But is that just to read like a reaction to the high volumes?
I mean, because naturally that would appear if you'd got these silly high volumes all over the
place, you would naturally end up having AD load popping up, I don't know, speculative.
And then it's interesting.
That there's, there's another stuff that happens where we could say that maybe some of the golden
era stuff is, is sort of taking from this seal that you're at and then, you know, adjusting it or
whatever.
And then we have general population borrowing or taking from the golden era.
And then we see, you know, personal trainers and coaches now taking, you know, the the deloading
structure they're using whatever and using that just with a general population climate as
absolutely.
Insane.
The idea that the general population would ever need to deload is absolutely off the charts insane.
That that is literally absolutely incredible to me.
I cannot believe anybody program would deload with a straight face for a general.
Well, again, unless you've got you.
Know if you get a client that comes to you like, yeah, I've been doing my own thing and I've got to
work it out of some Muscle Mag 50 sets?
Away you continue like OK, you're immediately deloading for the first kind of four weeks of your
trading with me.
Yeah sure, but that's yes.
But I have a long term genpop.
Client that you are then giving deloads to, yeah, that's the fact that we can get great.
Results with a couple of sets, you know, kind of or even single sets twice a week or you know, I
mean, the idea that anybody would be needing AD load is just incredible to me in that, in that, in
that demographic, I gave myself AD load last.
Week I could just sort of thought I'd throw that in there and it happened by convenience, not by
programming choice.
And I was travelling into state and I didn't train for I think it was a it would have been six or
seven days, which is probably the longest.
It may be the longest I've ever gone without training since I was like 13 and I didn't feel weird
about it.
I was like, this is great.
This is like, I don't assume I've got any accumulated fatigue, but I'm going to take it as an
opportunity.
I have no ability to easily train.
So I'm gonna use this to my advantage here and coming back.
I did notice that the muscle that is my highest priority at the moment.
So I'm doing a little bit more volume on chest than I have other muscles.
I performed better on chest when I came back in my first session back, I didn't notice anything for
any other muscles.
But for chest I did normally I would get 4 repetitions and I'd go 5 and probably had maybe like half
of your open reserve or something.
OK, so you're.
Overdoing it, yeah, yeah.
And and interestingly, I've still been progressing fairly well on chest.
So yeah, I guess I'm just overdoing it, but there was something to it.
And I'm I'm not using high volumes.
I mean like, no, but I always tell people.
Just as the one muscle that if you, if you do even a little bit more than you should be doing,
you're going to find it accumulates.
Yeah.
There you go.
So, so that really kind of then brings us to the question of, well, OK, so we've just spent the last
kind of 20 minutes or I've spent the last 20 minutes ranting about how, you know, a deload really
isn't necessary and shouldn't be necessary and we don't want to program one.
But if you do find that you are doing 1, then really the options are very varied.
But ultimately, if you you, I mean, like you've done, you could just literally take a week off.
I mean, OK, not not the best solution because, you know, that is a whole week of, of atrophy time,
but you know, not the end of the world.
But if you're talking about taking a deal over for a couple of weeks like you know, may or even
slightly longer, then we probably do want to be doing some kind of training and we want to be trying
to make sure that we don't lose very much muscle in that period of time.
But simultaneously, we don't want to negate the whole point of having the deload, which is to
recover.
And really all I want to say here is that.
The kind of.
Best way of structuring A deload which maximises the kind of retention of muscle mass while avoiding
any kind of loss.
And just just kind of in case people haven't been following this podcast or don't know, you know
what I've said before about retention of muscle mass, The maintenance literature makes it really
clear that muscle mass is lost in a training week, so within a seven day period.
And we've got some nice data from the D training studies.
A very famous study from the, I think late 90s in very well trained power lifters showed significant
losses of muscle size after two weeks.
There's some researchers running around at the moment saying that advanced lifters don't lose muscle
within, you know, kind of several weeks of, of not training.
It's just they're not looking at the literature.
I've literally got studies on the FAQ showing you advanced power lifters losing significant amounts
of muscle after two weeks of not training maintenance.
It makes it very clear as well that people with, you know, kind of multiple months of of previous
strength training programming stop training immediately.
Sorry, not stop training, drop down to once a week training and basically immediately just flatline
all the gains.
So that shows you basically that gaining muscle from each workout and then losing it again by the
following week.
So both the maintenance and the D training literature show us that strange training people in the
case of the powerlifters, relatively good strength training experience do lose muscle relatively
quickly.
So we don't want to be messing around and deload.
But fortunately we also know that training twice a week with even just single sets is totally fine
to make sure that we don't we we actually make gains on that.
So it would be even better than, you know, just sort of maintenance.
So.
That that's kind of where I would start.
With I would start with by saying, look, you know a great deload structure would be train twice a
week, cover all your bases, single sets.
I think even if we were.
To go one step back, if someone's asking about D loads, I think we need to identify what, what
category are you in for requiring AD load.
And so for me, I didn't, I, I don't think I required a D load.
Like I said, I was still progressed.
We obviously did well.
But but you know.
What do you mean by that?
Because I I hadn't the toed Because you're accumulating fatigue.
And the thing about accumulating fatigue is you don't get to, it doesn't stop accumulating.
That's the problem.
Just because it was just, you caught it before it got really bad, but it it was going to bite you
eventually.
Well, it probably wouldn't.
Because I'm I wouldn't have maintained high volume for chess for that long.
So it realistically probably six weeks from now I would have been in the same situation.
But my point is you, you may have a client or you yourself may still be progressing.
And then maybe like you said, there's some fatigue that is accumulating hasn't beat you yet and
you've got an option there.
So I for your clients like that, I'm not just going to throw a deload at them without because
there's, there was no evidence.
There was no feedback to me that I needed a deload, right?
The feedback to me that I needed to deload would be that I wasn't progressing.
And so I'm not just going to throw that person a deload just in case that's that's a waste of a week
or, or whatever, right?
So what I would do with clients in that situation is if an opportunity arises like it did for me,
you're going travelling for a week and it's just going to be really hard to train.
Let's use that one way.
If it's more than a week, I'm I'm going to get them to find a way to train.
If it's one week, I'm going to say, look, let's use that week.
And I'm assuming this is happening once or twice a year.
If it's a week, a month, no, but if it's one week every now and then, I'd say let's use that week as
a opportunistic deload.
And let's see was any accumulated fatigue that we didn't know about.
Maybe, maybe not, let's find out.
And there's not, OK, well, we've lost one week of atrophy like you said, but in the scheme of doing
this once a year, it's probably not going to be a big issue, right?
The other category of person is someone who says I've, I've Plutonia, you know, I'm, I'm not
progressing.
I've maybe, I'm aware that I've been doing higher volumes and I need to do something and probably
deload is a good starting point.
And so and, and I guess that kind of goes back to what you said at the start.
We've got these kind of planned deloads and then we've got these sort of reactive opportunistic type
deloads.
And so in that second category with someone saying, hey, I'm pretty sure I need a deload.
My performance is telling me that.
Then you're saying, hey, this is a really good way of programming that a single stand, there's
nothing.
Fundamentally bad about doing AD load if you do it properly moving.
Forwards, yeah, if you drop back.
Twice a week with single sets.
You're actually going to be moving forward just slightly slower than you were doing with three times
a week with single sets, or three times a Week 2 sets, whatever it was that you were previously
doing.
So you're not really, if you program properly, what I was introducing people towards introducing
people to is this, this idea that planning a deload basically means that you're planning to
accumulate fatigue, which is actually the problem.
The deload itself is fine.
It's the training state of fatigue that's going to cause problems because that is going to be the
thing that actually causes less adaptations to happen, not the actual kind of deload itself.
The deload itself is actually a pretty good way of trading it.
That's in terms of the.
Single set twice a week, Yeah.
So a lot of people go, oh, you don't.
Want me to do a D load because the D load is is is losing kind of gains.
I'm like, no, actually, I'd rather you just train in the D load all the time.
It's it's the idiotic, it's the Dorian almost.
Well.
I don't know, I mean.
The Dorian programme we just reviewed wouldn't have accumulated any fatigue.
So if you'd no, that's my point.
It's it's.
Almost a D load all the time.
This in the sense that it's a single set.
Well, you know it's 3 or 4.
Exercises once a.
Week it wouldn't work for natural lift as we.
As you described, no, but it's an, it's an enhanced.
Version of a deload, Yeah, I mean basically.
That would have functioned as a deload programme, more or less give or.
Take.
I mean, there's a few.
Kind of set reductions you could have done here and there.
But yeah, I mean, basically if you were kind of, yeah.
I mean, the point I'm making is training in a classic kind of golden era.
This is why I wanted you to do a golden era programme with tons of volume because it made the
compensation so much easier.
If you're doing kind of classic golden era programme with billion sets per workout, then the problem
is not the D load that you do to recover from that silly programme.
It's the silly programme that's the problem.
It's the insane amount of volume that means you're training in constant fatigue, which you don't get
any adaptations.
Then you switch to doing the deload and actually the deload is the only time you're actually getting
any gains meaningfully because that's the bit where you're actually capable of stimulating muscle
growth.
So the point is not about the deload itself, which is why I made the distinction between planning a
deload and therefore assuming you're going to accumulate fatigue, which is bad, and taking a deload
because you just feel that you need one, which is good.
Actually, you can construct a deload in a way that is really, really effective.
You just as I say, drop down to twice a week, do everything on both days, so full workout on both
days of all the exercises you're going to do single sets and that should be absolutely fine.
Now I would go one step further and say that given that we know that the last report to of a set to
failure is going to give you a higher chance of accumulating calcium iolated fatigue and therefore
post workout fatigue.
If you're working with moderate loads, especially at the higher end of that zone kind of 12 to 15.
I would probably leave 2 rips in reserve definitively.
If I was working kind of more at the bottom end of that kind of range 567, then I would probably
only need one Rep in reserve and I think that would probably be pretty much perfect for a deload
situation.
In that case, I wouldn't want to leave more reps in reserve because I think if you're doing single
sets and that is basically your only kind of chance of stimulating the muscle growth twice a week
and I wouldn't want to risk ending up not having enough stimulating reps in each session.
I wouldn't want to say, well, let's do 33 reps in reserve or 4 reps in reserve.
And then because you know, the day you feel this, so you feel that you don't feel quite right.
Maybe it ends up slipping up to five in reserve and then you've got nothing out of that work out at
all.
Or even if it is, you know, kind of a stimulating report to then it might not be enough twice a week
to just kind of tip you over to be net positive across the week.
Wouldn't, I mean, ultimately, if you look at the curve of how calcium amino fatigue increases with
and the number of reps to failure, it just goes asymptotic in the last two, two reps.
So if you missed those last two in a moderate load scenario, I cannot see that you're going to have
any post work up to you at all.
In fact, there are literally studies showing that if you're again, sort of 567 Rep Max is I think
probably 1 is buying.
So I don't I don't buy this whole kind of reps and reserve is the critical thing.
I think to reps and reserve and you're probably fine.
I mean, that's a good point.
Because if you look at the way people program deloads, assuming we're not just saying take a week
off, then the two ways they do it is either many reps in reserve or here's the other one.
I mean this is still reps in reserve but the other other way he could talk about it is just reducing
like doing a normal gaps and you just like halve the load so oh you normally do 10 drives me loads
it literally.
Might as well just sit on the sofa and watch TV rather than go to the gym.
There is literally no point in going to the gym and doing.
The pain is you're maintaining a.
Habit so you don't.
If that's what they need, that's fine, but it's.
But that's all you're doing.
You're doing.
It's just garbage.
That's, that's like, that's literally kind of that's, that's mad.
That's literally people who know nothing about how strength training works at all.
Oh, that's absolutely.
I remember sitting in a seminar.
And they were talking about deloading.
This would have been 10 or 15 years ago, 10 years ago, OK spend.
The Dark Ages now.
And that was.
They came up with these are the two ways to deload.
You can just halve the load or you can reduce repetitions and they're like, it's the same, just pick
one, doesn't matter.
OK, come on.
There was no obviously no, you know Physiology has said was a pre stimulating Rep model.
It's just in that world, isn't it?
You go any any time I go outside this bubble that we've created, I'm just.
Shocked.
I literally I was.
Sending you clips from social media this week.
And I, I said to you, I said just just brace yourself before you watch this because you're going to
lose brain cells.
I honestly cannot believe what I see when I leave the bubble that we've created.
It is mad.
Yeah, Yep, it.
Is.
It's it's definitely.
Trying to see some of the stuff that's out there and so so anyway we're.
Creating like a sort of perfect deal out.
And you were giving a counterpoint to the kind of sort of general recommendations of basically not
doing any stimulating reps at all, which was, you know, kind of my point when I was saying don't,
don't take too many reps in reserve.
I don't think it needs to because of the asymptotic nature of the the nonlinear way in which calcium
relative T builds.
So what I'm saying here to be really, really clear as you do like a 10 Rep Max calcium I relative T
does not build linearly across the set.
It builds non linearly.
So the first kind of 567 reps are doing nothing for calcium I know to relative T as you go into the
last three reps or so it starts to build very quickly.
And two, the last two are really where the vast majority of that calcium I accumulation is
happening.
So if you just cut off the last two reps, do 8 reps of A10 Rep Max, you'll probably get almost no
calcium I'm related to fatigue happening.
And that means that there's no motivation for us to trim any more reps off.
Going to 4 reps in reserve or five reps are having that doesn't help you.
It just loses stimulus while actually not gaining anything in terms of reducing post work apartment.
So that's the reason I'm arguing against this idea of taking large numbers of reps in reserve.
And as I say, I'm concerned that with too many reps in reserve, a lot of people find that they
actually end up without the sufficient stimulus across the week to maintain muscles.
There's a very famous study extreme, I always call it extreme volume training.
I forget the exact title, it's by Cody Horn.
Basically they trained with pretty high numbers of sets for I think 5 or 6 weeks and they had four
point on average 4.14.2 reserve.
And basically despite doing like a billion sets, they got almost various measures of muscle growth.
They got zero growth happening in the muscles that they tested.
I think one of the measures of muscle growth actually tripped significance.
Most of the rest of them didn't.
I don't remember the exact kind of these other bit.
It basically showed that if you train with four Epsom reserve, even if you do a ton of sets, it
doesn't really compensate.
Great validation for the stimulating reps model if you're looking for it, but there you go.
So my point being is I don't think it's a great target to aim for.
I think that two reps of reserve is way way better because it gets you almost if not all of the post
work fatigue reduction while maintaining as many stimulating reps as possible.
Now.
If somebody's going to do something like this, I do.
Think it's beneficial to do it as a full body and do the two workouts as full body because like we
were saying with the drawing plan, we're looking at that and we're like, well, he kind of made me
get a little bit of chest on this day and you're kind of maybe getting a little bit of this on that
day.
And if you're doing a split like that, I think you run the risk of of potentially unknowingly having
overlap that might be impacting your.
But if they're not, then I'm not.
Uncomfortable about people splitting that up into four and doing upper lower.
Yeah, I mean, upper lower is hard.
Yeah, it's hard.
To stuff up an upper lower, unless you know maybe you're following the same guidelines doing single.
Sets and, you know, kind of a couple of reps in reserve.
You know, I think you could use that for a deal.
I mean, it starts to kind of feel like you're not giving your brain a rest if you go to the gym four
times a week, which would kind of, for me be a little bit irritating.
I felt like I still had to go to the gym 4 times.
I mean, which is actually one more time than I currently go.
Yeah, if you're doing a deload, I think you may as well take.
Make the most of it and see, I mean, this is the way, not just deloading.
This is the way.
I would talk about basically anything when it comes to health and fitness is your body doesn't know
why you're doing something.
Like you could viably choose to do something in a whole stack of different ways for different
reasons.
Like we've just said, you know, we can choose to do, you can choose to do single sets because it's
going to be motivating, whatever.
And suddenly you have a situation thrust upon you with with things that are out of your control.
And now you need to do something in a particular way.
And people start freaking out like, I didn't want to do it that way.
I wanted to do it this way.
And it's like, well, your body doesn't know that you're doing it that way now because you've had
control taken away from you and you can't get to the gym four days a week.
You can't do XYZ.
This was a perfectly viable way of training or doing whatever had you chosen to do it.
So, you know, let's you don't need to freak out.
People tell themselves exactly, exactly.
So how can we take this?
And use it to our advantage.
You've made a point there about.
The last couple of.
Repetitions obviously being the most damaging there with calcium ion accumulation, but if someone
were to do a single set twice a week to failure, I don't think they would accumulate fatigue.
I'm just.
Making the assumption that they have previously been doing some training which has inadvertently led
to accumulated fatigue.
So I'm trying to minimise the additional kind of posterity on top of that and give them the
opportunity to dissipate as much of the accumulated fatigue as possible as quickly as possible.
That's the only reason.
As quickly as possible, I think is a key keyed.
Line there because ultimately someone were to choose to do a single set twice a week to failure.
That will still function like a deload, but it will be a lower deload exactly which is the case
which is always the.
Case, I mean, you could, you could, if you wanted to do 3 workouts a week of single sets to failure
and you could run that.
You're just going to find that your deload lasts an extra week or two, eight weeks.
Or whatever.
I mean, you could just switch to that way of.
Training and stop writing silly trading programs.
This is why I mention it because.
If someone, if someone came to us and they're like, hey, I don't know, do I need to do it, do a
deload?
I'm not sure.
I'm not, I'm not really motivated to do 1, but like maybe I've accumulated fatigue.
What I would say there, to my point a moment ago is how can we use this to your advantage?
Well, maybe we use single sets to failure.
We get some of that motivational boost.
We see what you're capable of with that single set.
Maybe we'll even access mode units you haven't been accessing before and it's still going to
function like AD load.
We're just going to do it for a little bit longer.
Maybe this is our next six weeks now we're actually going to just change your program.
And, and who knows, maybe you're going to be like, hey.
This is amazing.
I've never performed this well.
Let's keep doing it forever.
Which is, yeah, kind.
Of where you end up.
Yeah, I think this is really, yeah, this is really illustrative of the whole point, which is that
ultimately, you know, the only reason D loads kind of, well, no, that's not necessarily true because
potentially D loads do you have a role to play in, in, in anabolic using situations where maybe it's
injury risk or an injury prevention thing.
But in in in kind of natural lifting circumstances, you know, the only reason that dealers are
getting thrown around is because people are doing silly training programs with stupidly high
volumes.
If, if we, you know, kind of migrate people away from that and suddenly the dealer just becomes one
of those things that almost only ever happens if life circumstances push it upon us, you know, And
then it's just kind of like, oh, well, I'll just kind of restrict to my training week next week and
I'll do 2 workouts in 03 or I'll do one workout in 03 or, you know, whatever.
And it, it ceases to become a thing.
I guess really my my kind of objections to the whole kind of deload conversation, really just drill
down to the reasons why people think they need them, which I think most of the time just completely
invalid.
And, and, and then secondly, how you actually construct them, which, as I say, really they're again
constructed very much like a good training programme, but not really that different at all.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
I mean, ultimately that's they're.
The the two key topics when it comes to deloading is how do you, well, actually, how do you know you
need one?
I sort of touched on this when I said, hey, if you've plateaued, you're not progressing, but you,
you made a comment a few times that if you feel like you need a deload, is someone sitting here
saying, I don't know if I feel like I need a deload?
How do I know if I feel like I need a deload?
Is there any pointers or tips you would give to them?
It honestly it doesn't matter.
Just take.
One just program.
Just program it properly.
And then this is the and here's a troubling Chris.
So because we've just said.
If you do single sets, you're going to perform better most likely, almost certainly.
So you now do your quote UN quote D load and suddenly you're performing two more repetitions than
you have normally.
You don't know if that was fatigue or if that was his self pacing that's occurring with multiple
sets.
So what you're saying just do single sets then everyone just do a single set of that?
Yeah, I've never seen that tested.
I was.
I was.
I was.
Pitching for someone to do a P.
HD on that, I think the way we've landed is regardless single.
Sets is probably a good approach for most most purposes.
Most goals, yeah.
Just yeah, repeating what I said before, the deload itself is not the problem as long as you program
it properly.
The problem is that if.
We're programming.
On the assumption that we're going to take a deload, then we'll end up writing a silly.
Programme because.
We'll end up writing programmes that accumulate fatigue and that's not a very good place to be.
OK.
My final question for you is how long?
Does a deload need to be give or take?
Well, that's just.
How long is a piece of string question I mean, but people may not know that.
I mean, ultimately if you want a.
Physiological limitation.
Then you're never going to need deload for bodybuilding purposes.
That lasts more than about six weeks.
There's probably a lot longer than people expected to.
Hear you say though, so if you've been logical limitation so the reason I give.
That is because if you look at muscle fibre regeneration timetables, that's kind of the back end.
So if you if you kind of create really severe muscle damage, again, people will get confused if they
don't know what the literature says about muscle damage.
But I think I've been through this before, but basically there is a difference between activity
induced as in activation induced muscle damage, which is what we're talking about 99% of the time
and strain, strain injury either at a kind of fibre level or at a fibre bundle level, which is a
different thing.
So I'm not talking about an actual strain injury here that can take a lot longer to fix.
I'm talking about just normal muscle damage that happens as a result as a result of of muscle fiber
activation and calcium and accumulation.
So when we're talking about normal muscle damage, you've generally got a timeline of about 5 or 6
weeks maximum for the fibre to actually go necrotic dye and regenerate all the way back to its
previous state.
That would be unusual to actually happen in many fibres over any kind of straight training period of
time.
You would, you're not even likely to be in that category.
Most of the time the fibre will not need to go necro to die and regenerate.
Most of the time it'll just repair itself.
But if the fibre experiences so much damage that it's likely to spend more time repairing itself
than it would do by just simply dying, regenerating, then it will die and regenerate.
So you can kind of basically based on those two observations, you can kind of now give yourself a
backstop of saying, well, there's no way I can create more fatigue in a muscle by the muscle damage
processes.
Then it's going to take kind of six weeks to repair.
It's not possible.
So you can kind of kind of put a backstop on it and say that's about the maximum amount of time that
you can possibly get to.
Now, as I say, you can create a strain injury that will take longer to recover.
That's a separate question.
The actual muscle damage is never going to take that long and that will be an absolute extreme end
of the kind of spectrum.
Most of the time.
I think it's going to be 3 to 4 weeks.
It's going to be much more likely kind of zone if you like, for a for a severe fatigue accumulation.
So somebody's been doing a crazy kind of golden era program and as you say, they arrive and you kind
of have to put them on AD load straight away.
I would say that four weeks is probably more reasonable, but that would still be training maybe
single search twice a week.
Yeah.
Yeah, yeah, we're not.
Saying 4 weeks of not doing anything, we're saying that four weeks of the single said twice a week.
Yeah, yeah.
And so I think the best way to think about that phase a deload is, is probably a phased deload.
And you know, obviously phase is a bit of an arbitrary term as well, but most people usually are
looking and I'd say anywhere from kind of four to 10 weeks or five to 10 weeks from most phases that
they're doing before they make some alterations.
And I think maybe a logical way of thinking about it is do a deload phase, which is one set twice a
week.
Yeah.
And I think.
You know, realistically.
That's going to work brilliantly for the vast majority of situations.
I would I would add in the couple of reps in reserve only if it was very clear that what had
happened previously was just nuts, you know, for whatever reason.
But yeah, I think generally speaking, I mean, this kind of kind of ties in with, you know, if, when
I'm thinking about programming for like maybe elderly people, again, you know, where recovery is a
really big issue.
And so it's not, it's not that you're thinking in that scenario.
You're not thinking about, you know, accumulate reducing accumulated fatigue.
You're just thinking about not accumulating in the 1st place because you don't have the capacity to
recover from it.
So again, what do I program that while I'm programming single search times a week?
Again, do I program reserve?
Not really, Yeah.
And if.
Someone is looking at listening.
To this and they're thinking well hang on I don't want to do 2 sessions for the next six weeks I
want to be in the gym like you said well you can do upper lower you can go to the gym 4 days and
still do your deload if you want yeah I.
Mean that's.
That's yeah, I'm I.
Struggle to understand.
People like that, but there are plenty of people like.
That so we need to give them that option.
I would encourage them to you.
Know find something else to enjoy in life to like read one of the.
Philosophy books that I.
Recommend on my page I thought of three.
Really.
Really.
Offensive things to say that I rejected all of them because this is working through the listing you
might.
This is supposed to be.
A A positive enough building space.
An accessible podcast that doesn't have.
Rude words in it, so yeah, but suffice it to say that I would quite.
I can think of many things that I would suffer to do rather than read a philosophy book.
Coming coming from someone who is.
That's great.
Most of the philosophy books that I I bring up when I talk to you, you're like, Oh yes, I read that
15 years ago and totally not true.
OK, I think, I think we're clearly done.
Thank you guys for listening to our deload episode.
As always, let us know if you've got topic ideas.
We've been doing a few more those lately and I have had some and I've had a couple of topic
suggestions.
We will be hitting those up.
But if you do have ideas he wants to cover, drop us a message in our Q&A.
Let us know.
And thank you to everyone who has signed up to our new train Heroic Capacity Past and Present
training group, which is our Silver Era, not just inspired, it is it is very much a silver era plan.
You know, we're taking plans from the silver era.
All we're doing is making some small adjustments to make sure that our, you know, current
understanding of bio mechanics makes sense with what we're seeing.
And we're making sure that these plans work for a home gym.
So thank you to everyone who signed up for that.
We are in our gosh, we're starting our second week today.
So there's still you can, you know, often get people asking, do I need to wait till a new phase?
No, no, you jump in whenever.
So if you wanna get in on the action, then the links are in both of our Instagram pages.
We'll be back next week.
With another topic.
Thank you again.