Episode: 055 How to build the biggest back possible
URL: https://open.spotify.com/episode/4V19AuL7I9I2oqb3rbw7HM
Published: 2026-06-08
================================================================================

Welcome back.
Thank you for joining us for yet another episode of hypertrophy past and present.
And we're now well and truly over the year mark, I think 55 episodes in.
So we, I think we, we flagged it like a week before our year anniversary and then I forgot to to
mention it the following week.
But thank you guys for joining us for a year journey on this so far.
And we also announced last week that I guess almost in commemoration of a year of doing this, we
have launched A hypertrophy pass and present training group.
So it is a silver era inspired, trained heroic group where you can join along with a silver era
style workout.
You can do that from a home gym as long as you've got access to barbell, dumbbell bench, squaw cage,
pull up bar and our first workout to starting this week.
So we've got info in both of our social media profiles.
If you guys are interested.
We've got a group of people who are ready to go, some who even jumped in and and did the workouts
early, which actually that's helpful information.
So just so you guys know, the workouts take about an hour.
That's something that's been fed back to me from people who who'd launched in a little bit early.
And this phase we are using a Ridgepark inspired program, but not the traditional 3 by 5 or 5 by 5.
The Dredge Park is known for it's a what he called a definition program, which we've covered in the
past.
If you guys want to go check out that episode.
Now today we are back to a audience, an audience requested topic.
And we've covered a few of these topics so far.
And these are exercise, no exercise, muscle specialization or how to maximize X muscle.
And today we're gonna talk about how to maximize back growth.
Now I've got a specialization program here.
And the way that these sillier specialization phases worked is they tended to keep a standard
program.
So they'll still do their full body, usually be, you know, single sets that that normally reduce the
volume of the other full body work.
And then that would add in the specialization exercises for whatever muscle they're trying to
specialize in.
So here we have a period radar, a specialization phase for back.
And he actually split it up.
So he had a lats specialization and then he had like a erectors traps specialization.
So I'm going to talk about both of them together.
And again, this would be added into your standard full body stuff now, period.
Just so you guys know, in case you don't know who that is, he was the founder of Iron Man magazine
back in 1936, I think, and was not so much known for competing but known for educating.
So he was one of this sort of key educators in the silver area.
He really put forward a whole, a lot of training ideas and, and methodologies and you know,
potentially after Joe Weider and I guess maybe maybe Hoffman, I'd say Puri sort of introduced the
most kind of, you know, novel ideas into the silver era of bodybuilding.
He doesn't seem to be talked about as much nowadays, maybe because he didn't compete, but he did
write a lot and there's a lot of very interesting information about his ideas.
So the specialisation phase.
So again, remember this on top of the full body stuff.
I'm not going to talk about the full body stuff.
So for lats he included two exercises.
Now he had two variations of both of these exercises.
So you could al you could alternate, you could do one for a while and then do the other.
You weren't going to do both in the same workout.
OK, so the first exercise was either a single arm cable, straight arm pull down.
So the way he would do this is in a, in a pulley cable station and he would have one arm overhead,
fully vertically overhead in like a pronated position.
And he would pull down keeping a straight arm down to about hip height.
And I, I believe he talked about sort of coming a little bit sort of like horizontally or diagonally
across the body slightly.
And he said you could do that or you could alternate that with a, a be a A2 armed row.
He didn't specify whether that was dumbbell barbell.
I don't think he probably particularly minded, but you could do that.
And I assumed that that was more sort of sagittal plane type rowing.
And then the second lat exercise he used was a frontal plane pull down.
Now he said he could either do this with a lat pull down or you could do it as a pull up and you
could do the pull up behind the neck.
So both of them he wanted to be done behind the neck, either behind the neck lat pull down or behind
the neck pull up.
So as sort of frontal plane as possible, so that were the two lat exercises and then the two kind of
erectors traps exercises were again, he gave two options here and the first option was a barbell
dead hang clean or barbell high pull.
Now these were quite similar and you know, I guess a little bit more Olympic lifting in nature and
the high pull, the way he talked about doing this was you're you're sort of in AI guess hang
position with a barbell.
And then basically you're you're almost using, you're using momentum and you're rowing up to neck
height.
And so it's like this sort of hybrid kind of half a clean, half an upright row, but it's a dynamic
sort of momentum type movement.
And he talks about this allowing one to handle huge amounts of load and the very heavy loads of ones
able to, to use and, and sort of use the momentum to get through that starting position and get into
that top position.
He talks about that being really advantageous from a trap perspective.
And then the second exercise, which again he said is probably the most significant trap building
exercise that they did was a stiff leg deadlift or a stiff leg deadlift.
And he talked about the words he used.
It was a deadlift hopper.
I don't know if are you familiar with the deadlift hopper.
Doesn't ring any bells to me, no.
So it took me quite a while to decipher what he meant.
I've got an image of I don't know if you can see that no one else can see this, but you might be
able to.
So that is a, a diagram of how to construct a deadlift hopper.
And essentially it is kind of like blocks.
And I think what, what you'll, what it allows you to do is do a deadlift off blocks touch and go
style.
So they're like, it's, I guess, sturdy type blocks, maybe they have a little bit of of bound to
give.
It's made out of wooden planks, but it allows one to do touch and go partial stiff leg dead lifts.
Now again, he talks about how that's going to allow for more load to be used.
And that seems to be very important here in this idea of of maximally developing ones reactors and
traps.
So no shrug, no Kelso, no vertical shrug, nothing or nothing of that sort which was being used.
Kelso's not so much, but vertical shrugs were being used at this point in time.
And we talked about Drudge Park last week and he in fact did a similar exercise to this hopper.
He would do a a partial stiff leg dead lift off blocks and he'll actually do a shrug at the top.
So it's interesting that that's not being used here, but I don't want to steal your Thunder.
Tell me, what do you what what do you sort of think of this exercise selection here for back?
Well, I find it interesting actually that I think today's podcast is the first one possibly ever
where you didn't ask me at the beginning, how are you today, Chris?
Which I thought was actually quite ironic because it's probably one of the first times I actually
had something to say.
Because obviously we've launched the new group, which is very exciting and I hope people will
support the podcast by joining the group.
But also, if that's not something that they want to do at the moment, I'm hoping that there will be
at least a wider appreciation of the existence of the silver era lifting kind of, I guess, community
as it was back then, or movement.
Because something that we've been talking about this week is the appearance of some bodybuilding
experts or bodybuilding kind of participants in the influences, if you like, in the, in the, in the
current era saying, oh, bodybuilding's only been around for, you know, 60 years.
And like, you know, two of us are looking at that going, what on earth are these people thinking?
You know, bodybuilding has been around way, way longer than that.
And, and you can't just kind of say, oh, well, you know, bodybuilders have been doing, you know,
this kind of way of training for the last 60 years.
Therefore, it's the right way of doing things.
Well, no, that's just not true.
You know, bodybuilders have been doing been completely different for a lot longer than that, right
up until the point when steroids were introduced, in which case suddenly everything changed.
And that's the point we're always making with this podcast, which is that bodybuilding actually is
very, very, very kind of repeatable and very, very predictable in the way that it operates right up
or was right up until the point when steroids were introduced.
And suddenly everything just went crazy.
And what we've got today is people talking, you know, kind of saying, Oh well, bodybuilding has
always been like this.
Well, no, it hasn't.
It's a completely different animal.
So yeah, so please do join the group.
But even if you can't join the group, please do educate the wider fitness industry that silver
aerolifters existed and trained in this particular way.
And it worked really, really well for them.
And prime example, of course, would be the thing that you've been talking about this week, which is
that silver aerolifters often would do squats 3 times a week.
And we've got hundreds and thousands of people all over the fitness industry screaming, saying it's
impossible to recover from squats 3 * a week.
What are you talking about?
I'm like, just go back and read some history.
So it's it's actually.
Something to say now.
So my take away from this is you love it when I ask how you're doing and you love the small talk and
I should do more than I just like.
To annoy you most of the time.
I think it is being contrarian, that's what it is.
If I do the small talk, if I don't do it, very possible.
Anyway, No, I think that's, that's obviously a very interesting point.
And people have a very short term memory.
And I always have a bit of a chuckle to myself.
And people say, oh, but look what potty builders used to do.
And then they name people in the 80s and it's like, OK, but can we just go a little bit further back
and look what they did a little bit before that.
So it is a very interesting space whenever you talk about I even had someone, I even had someone
saying name 1 bodybuilder.
If you do any of that like and they're like you can't use Google name name 1 bodybuilder ever
trained like that and like Cremic Reeves Rich Bark, like there's so many like really there's we just
don't have an understanding of the silver bodybuilding timeline.
So yes, hopefully this does gain a little bit of popularity, if only for the the sake of people who
it would benefit from training this way.
You know, again, if you do have access to a home gym, this is the stuff that's kind of work for you.
And a lot of people are being dissuaded from doing it because there's this rhetoric online that now
you can't possibly train the way that everyone trained up into anabolics.
Absolutely.
So this program that you've talked about today, this is really cool because what you can see in the
LATS specialisation section is that we've basically got a sagittal plane kind of exercise selection
and a frontal plane exercise selection.
You know, which is absolutely amazing because it's the point I've been making for the last year or
two, which is that that is exactly the way to target the lats.
We want 2 separate exercise groupings, One that's going to give us the upper thoracic part of the
lat and 1:00 that's going to give us the lumbar, pelvic lumbar and pelvic sections of that.
Ultimately the straight arm cable pull down is probably going to have peak force roundabout shoulder
height, which is OK.
That's you know going to target thoracic that pretty effectively the two arm row with a barbell.
Again, I'm assuming that would be in the search plane if he's talking about using lats because
obviously transverse plane wouldn't do anything for the lat.
So again, really, really good set of and that again would have probably peak, peak effort somewhere
between shoulder height and sorry, 45°, something like that.
So again, pretty much bang on for training.
Thoracic lap and then front to plane.
What do you think of that X?
That single cable straight arm pull down well.
I'm not actually a I'm not a cable fanboy really.
I don't I don't like cables most of the time.
I think the way the, SO I say to people most of the time cable exercise is going to be unstable and
instantly they start making arguments about the cable and I'm like, no, no, no, I'm not actually
talking about the cable itself.
I'm talking about your body position while you're using the cable.
Because most of the time if you look at somebody doing a cable exercise, their actual only point of
stability is the feet on the ground and that's garbage.
I mean, there's no way you can produce enough force in that scenario while avoiding falling over,
you know, to create the level of motinic room that you want.
And all that single arm makes it easier if you've got then like stability that you're holding on to
something, but you have to be holding on to something.
And a lot of cable stations, I don't know what the ones you have over there like, but there's one of
the gym that I go to here, it's got these physically like these metal bulbous kind of handles built
in all around it.
And so you can stabilize yourself.
Fantastic, fantastic.
But generally the most exposure I have to cable exercises is actually in the Essence Sea community
where they tend to use a lot of single arm kind of cable work.
And they generally got the athlete in a kind of sort of semi athletic stance, slightly flexed knees,
standing and literally they're just pulling the cable.
I'm like garbage, instantaneous.
I'm looking at this as garbage.
They're not doing anything because the only point of stability is the floor and they're not going to
be able to pull hard enough to actually, you know, create any kind of decent stimulus.
So but if they've got the ability to lock themselves down with another, you know, kind of hand on a
physical object, like a like AI don't know, side of a sport rack or something, and potentially also
do that seated.
And so they're holding something with one hand and they're locking the kind of legs underneath a
padded, you know, sort of the purposed bench then OK, fine.
Now you've got an interesting kind of set up where you can actually resist the forces that are
pushing the rest of your body around, and that's going to work.
So it really would depend on what he was actually doing as he was kind of.
So, assuming you were able to stabilize yourself, hold on to something fantastic.
Yeah, So that's the point I'm making.
I've got nothing actually against cables per SE.
It's just that most of the time when I see people doing cable exercises, they're massively unstable.
And, and again, the point is that people don't really necessarily immediately think about what
stability is.
I'm just like, literally just look at where the what, what, what other parts of your body are
physically in contact with a immovable object and they'll just go, well on my feet and like it's not
going to work.
There's so many photos of particularly in particular Ridge Park, I don't know if you've seen them,
where he's stabilizing himself and he'll have people like sitting on him or like hanging off his
back and like he's doing a lap pull down.
And he'll talk about get people to sit across your waist while you do it.
And then people today make like they say, oh, you know, science.
Space lifting is so silly to try to stabilize things.
It's like, again, please, let's just go a little bit further back and look at what they used to do.
What's sillier, using a seat belt or having two guys sitting on your lap while you're doing a lap
pull down?
Is is, you know, So yeah, the point I'm making is nothing fundamentally objectionable about cables.
It's just the the scenario in which they're being used.
So yeah, in the scenario in which he is seated or at least stabilizing himself with some other, you
know, kind of point of contact, Fantastic.
And as I say, probably going to give him peak forces around about shoulder height if the cable is
vertically pointing downwards, maybe slightly different angle if a cable is coming at a different
kind of direction.
But you know, not going to be far off where it needs to be to create a good stimulus for the
thoracic that.
So yeah, I just I.
Really like it would be similar to a pullover machine, wouldn't it?
More or less, again depending on the point to peak effort in a pullover machine to be honest.
I mean The thing is you can recreate this quite easily with most narrow rows in a gym.
You don't need to go down the route of using this or even cable pull downs.
I mean it doesn't need to be.
The point is it has to be sagittal if you want the thoracic lap.
So you could use a.
You could actually use the same cable machine for both for both the frontal and sagittal plane if
you really need to.
Yeah, I thought it was interesting, given that so many people love pulled, love pullovers, and yet
complain when there's not a pullover machine.
It's like, well, actually this would kind of be the same thing.
You could just do this with the cable.
Yeah.
I mean, again, I will look at sort of stability and and that kind of thing.
But you know, fundamentally such complain stuff.
It's it's, you know, pretty much perfect for the thoracic life.
If it's if it's, if it's a genuine kind of straight arm pull down or, or kind of pull over machine,
then OK, you, you lose a little bit of biceps involvement.
Therefore you might get a little bit more that involvement, but you have to make sure the stability
is there for that to happen.
So yeah, I, I think the lat section of this work out is great.
It's, you know, literally just pick whichever exercise of that variety you really like and do one of
each really.
I'm going on behind the neck aspect because I know that that's another thing that gets a lot of
attention on.
Honestly, I think that's just one of those things where if it's comfortable, do it.
If it's not, don't, you know, I know that sounds really kind of banal, but really, you know, I've,
I've seen a lot of people do them and they say, oh, that's really comfortable for me.
I'm like, great, OK, I can't.
It's really uncomfortable for me.
Massively, massively uncomfortable for me and I'm very comfortable with my ANEC presses.
So it's, it's not like a physical location thought it's just, it's just the pulling really, really
is very uncomfortable for me to do that.
OK, you know, just so I don't do them.
Have you ever used them?
You know the mag grips like the the neutral type handles have?
You seen?
Well, yeah, sure.
You mean if you've got a pull up bar, which is not a bar but is actually like 2 handles and there's
a space in the middle where you can pull yourself into that like a trap bar would be if you're doing
trap bar deadlifts?
Yeah, I'm, I'm very comfortable in that.
That's no problem.
So you can get lap pulley on handles.
I've actually got some hanging in my wall behind me, maybe a little bit hard for you to see.
And you can get like wide neutral.
And I find that that neutral grip to get behind the neck feels so much better than using a like
pronated.
Yeah, I think it probably is.
I think it's probably the pronation that causes the issue.
I very much enjoy that that variation of doing behind the neck with the wide neutral, that's in fact
that's the frontal plane pull I use most of the time.
Yeah.
So as I say, I honestly would wouldn't get too uptight about the exact exercises in this kind of in
each of those categories.
I think, you know, they're just really good indicators that it's decided to play in in one category
and a front to play in the other.
Other than that, you know, nothing really more to add the the other category, spinal erectors and
trapezius.
I'm not a huge fan.
I'm not a huge fan of the selection here.
I don't like the Olympic weightlifting variations for power, for powerlifting, for for bodybuilding.
I don't I don't think I don't like powerlifting either.
I don't I don't think they're a great choice.
I think a lot of people just kind of go, Oh well, Olympic weight lifters have great traps.
Therefore I should do Olympic weightlifting exercises and like doesn't really work like that, you
know, so the the stiff leg deadlift off blocks.
I can see where he's going with that.
The issue is it, it, it, it will cause, it will cause the spiral erectus to kind of kind of
experience enough loading to grow, but I don't think it's the most effective or rapid way of making
that happen.
So generally speaking, if you look at the long term strength training literature, deadlift
variations don't really 'cause the directors to grow that quickly.
They will grow over time.
If you if you push your deadlift up far enough for long enough, yeah, they will absolutely.
I mean, they just can't.
They can't not.
But they're not the prime movers.
That's the issue.
They're kind of, if you get your prime movers to move far enough, they will have to go along with it
because you know, they've got to be able to support that loan.
But actual lumbar kind of extension is going to go a lot further, a lot faster to make that work.
And obviously thoracic extension you could do the same.
I was actually when you were describing it, I was desperately trying to find a whether it was an
article or a video, I can't remember.
But I remember Brett Contreras writing about thoracic extension a long time ago and I couldn't find
it when I just searched it just now.
But I seem to remember he used, I think he either used a front squat position or a safety bar
position and then essentially did thoracic extensions with that.
And I cannot find it now.
I cannot find it.
So if I was dreaming it, then I'm sorry.
I apologise to Brett.
But if somebody remembers that or can find it, then please send it to me because I thought it was
really quite interesting.
But as I say, I mean machine lumbar extension is, is definitely available because most gyms, many
gyms will have that that machine, they tend to have the the crunch machine and then they have the
number extension 1 next to it.
And that would be better than a back extension.
It will.
Well, a back extension isn't really a back extension, it's a hip extension.
That's the problem you see, and that's fundamentally what a a deadlift is.
A deadlift is a hip extension.
You're just creating isometric kind of contraction to hold the torso.
And the, the, the issue is if you're doing, if you're doing a decent enough weight, what will happen
is that the weight will start to pull you over and you'll have to exert an extension force, actually
a spinal extension force, not a hip extension force.
You'll have to exert a spinal extension force, whether both lumbar and potentially thoracic in order
to stop you from curving over.
So really what you're doing is isometric spinal extension throughout your hip extension kind of
activity.
So, yeah, I mean, if you use a, you know, pretty heavy load, like if you're doing rack pulls or
stiff leg deadlift type of blocks, which is essentially A stiff leg rack pull, you don't know what's
going to happen is that you're going to have a bigger amount of weight in order to, to resist, to
have to resist with your spinal extension.
So you, you end up doing isometric spinal extensions with a, you know, pretty chunky way.
Whether you're doing hip extension or not is kind of academic at that point.
It just is, you know, you're just bolting on another exercise to the one that you're trying to
target, which is never really a great idea if you're trying to target your spheric muscle group.
So really if you were going to do it this way using some kind of hip hinging exercise, what what
I've actually started doing if I'm using a hip hinge exercise more for back is I don't do it stiff
leg because I find that that limits low too much.
So I'll actually allow people to have a bit of a bent knee, more like Romanian deadlift react pool
style.
And I do like to touch and go because the touch and go again allows someone to use more load.
The issue, the issue with those situations is that we are kind of always compromising on something.
You, you kind of, you're kind of creating a lukewarm kind of does it all kind of exercise which is
never really going to do exactly what you want perfectly, you know, so.
You know, I like my lukewarm exercises.
I do think, I do think that natural lifters benefit from having a lukewarm exercise in there.
Well, it kind of spreads the activation over a large number of areas that you may not be targeting
unless you're, you know, kind of doing one of these crazy 63 exercise routines that some people have
come up with, which is I love looking at those videos.
It's fantastic.
I mean, just the creativity there is just wonderful, but you know, it's not going to be something
that most people do most of the time.
The point I'm making though is that if we're talking about back specialisation, then really having a
hip extension exercise that kind of does a bit of back work in there is not really what we should be
talking about.
So I, I actually don't like either of his exercises for erectus and trapezius.
I don't think they are really what we would want to do.
You know, I think better would be to start going down the route to say, well, OK, how can I, how can
I create an exercise that actually, you know, trains these muscles directly?
So in the context of seal that you're lifting, what would be a better erector exercise do you think?
So I mean, as I say, this kind of mythical exercise that I've got floating around in my brain that
that I thought that Brett Contreras had created, which is basically a thoracic extension where you
sort of allow the barbell to move you very slightly forward and then extend upwards again.
So you.
Almost like the very top bit of a Jefferson Curl, but with the bar on your back instead of in front
of you.
Well, I mean, I, I think I, I forget whether it was a front squat position.
Front squat position I think would be kind of perhaps if you were doing the traditional bodybuilding
front squat style with crossed arms, one hand on each shoulder, opposite opposing shoulder and then
basically just doing a thoracic extension in that top position of the front squat.
I think that would be quite interesting.
I can see this safety bar.
So this bar, I think is probably better because you've got much more control over what the bar is
doing in that scenario.
I mean, I suppose you could sort of set up in a 45° back extension and you could hold a dumbbell on
your like upper chest and then you could roll slightly your chin down over it and then extend your
upper back.
I mean, I'm talking about thoracic work here.
So if somebody doesn't have the proprioceptive control to differentiate between the thoracic and
lumbar spine, then this would be, you know, kind of out out of, you know, completely out of out of
the programming list.
But yeah, I mean, I'm not sure how.
I'm not sure how you would you would probably want to do seated.
Good morning.
That would probably get you where you wanted to.
Yeah, I.
Mean that's the closest thing to your machine.
You can set up, yeah, very, very, very carefully.
You could even do it in a squat rack.
So you could have the bar starting on pins and then you could pick it up and then you you could then
do a small range of motion from whichever part to the back you want to.
You could probably do that both thoracic and lumbar sections of the spine if you wanted to if you
had that proprioceptive control.
Yeah, that would be potentially challenging.
I'd be kind of, I'm surprised that seated good mornings when not I I don't recall ever seeing them
in any silver grid programs.
I mean, I'm sure that would have called them something else, but because you could do them even with
dumbbells, you don't even need to use a barbell.
I'm not sure I can visualize that.
If you have the dumbbells sort of between your legs, if you do like a wide stance seated.
Good morning.
So if you got your arms hanging down vertically.
That would technically be an RDLI think you have to have the bar on your back for it to be good
morning.
Now that's just my kind of way I think about the definitions.
Terminology wise, Oh OK.
I've always known that as a city dumbbell.
Good morning.
But I come from the Palkan world.
Maybe maybe different terminologies.
I just feel like the easiest way to differentiate between deadlift and and good morning variations
is which side.
Also the waiters.
Yeah, seated seated dumbbell Romanian deadlift.
That'll be a funny.
Anyways, that's yeah, that's an interesting.
I wonder why that wasn't ever used.
Maybe it was maybe I just haven't seen it.
OK, so we've got Lumbo go through.
I sick.
OK, So you're not you don't really like anything that he's?
I.
Don't hear.
I think the lat the lat section is brilliant.
Perfect.
Personally I wouldn't be doing those exact exercises, but movement pattern wise is bang on.
I don't actually like anything in the erectus and trapezius section.
I don't think trapezius is really getting worked at all in either of those two situations apart from
you can say, Oh well, no, it's getting worked in the Olympic weightlifting variations.
I'm like, well, yes, a little bit.
But again, the bar speed is so fast that you're getting just a blip at the beginning and then
nothing.
And in terms of the the stiff leg deadlift off blocks, nothing wrong with it as an exercise, but it
isn't really doing erectors that well.
It's more of a hip extension.
With the it's like the high pool, I don't think Kiri talks about this, but I have seen other silver
rare lifters talk about doing a variation of a high pool and they actually advocate for holding it
in the top position for a second it.
Actually looks more like an upright Rd. isn't it?
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Which is all the purposes you need.
To do with with erectors or trapezes.
Well the main difference is is how high they pull.
They do tend to pull up sort of chin height and so at that point you do kind of get this sort of
shrugging occurring.
OK, yeah, now I can.
See, and so I wonder if you were to do that slight pause, does that, not that it's a great exercise,
but does it overcome your issue there with the?
Not, not really, no.
I mean, honestly, I'd much rather a straight arm shrug in and, and again, it doesn't really matter
which kind of body position you want to do that shrugging, I don't think it makes that much
difference.
I mean, I recently went round the houses on the different regions of the trapezius because I was
kind of looking at the kind of data again and going, you know, is there a way to kind of make the
argument that different directions of shrugging create different like relative activations of the
different parts of the trapezius?
And this is a really important point that making it a different relative activations because you can
look at different shrugging directions, whether it's vertical and different kind of planes or
whether it's kind of horizontal or what have you diagonal.
And you can kind of sort of look at them and go, oh, well, no, there's a different magnitude of
activation.
I'm like, OK, cool.
But if I compare like the upper, middle and lower trapezius regions, is the relationship of the
activations of those two regions the same, you know, magnitude, ignoring the magnitudes, is the
actual relative activations of those two regions similar across all three or four or five trapezius
shrugging variations that you're looking at?
The reality is they are pretty much all the same.
You can get different magnitude to total activation, but they all kind of follow the same pattern
with, you know, starting more in this region, starting less in that region, starting more on the
third region or whatever.
It doesn't really matter.
They all kind of have the same pattern.
And So what you're getting is basically the same kind of distribution across three regions
irrespective of which direction you're shrugging in.
So honestly, I would just take out all the other muscles that are working because you've got like
delts and biceps and all kinds of stuff working when you're doing an upright row.
I would just go, well, just do straight arm shrugging and pick the angle that you like, whether it's
a genuine horizontal Kelso, whether it's a, you know, kind of diagonal Kelso because you're doing an
incline bench sort of chest supported row position, or whether it's a genuine kind of traditional
vertical shrug.
I genuinely don't mind.
Whichever 1 is easier for you set up, I think it's going to give you more or less the same answer.
And I think they're a better job than than the Olympic weightlifting their derivative.
In Reg Park's back specialization course, he has an exercise that I've not seen anyone do in modern
times, which is interesting because a lot of these old school exercises, eventually they come back
around and I wonder if we'll ever see this one come back around.
But it's imagine you've got a bar on your back like you're going to do a squat.
And then you do a shrug with the bar on your back like you're doing a squat.
I've seen that before.
I have.
What do you like?
I've I've given it a go one time I didn't sort of commit it's.
Really strange, doesn't it?
Didn't feel great.
You know, I think I I probably need to do with the mirror so I could actually get a little bit of
visual feedback.
But I mean, sure, you can get a lot of load on there like.
Reverse shrug.
Yeah.
Any thoughts on that exercise?
No, it didn't feel kind of very natural to me when I did it, but it's a very long time ago now.
Yeah, maybe it takes a little bit of getting used.
To I wonder whether it would be possible to do one in a carf race machine, because that would be a
lot more comfortable.
Yeah, interesting.
I've not tried that.
It just suddenly occurred to me.
I just suddenly thought, well, what would be the equivalent machine?
Variation.
Yeah.
I I don't see why it wouldn't work.
OK, that's my homework for the week.
Yeah.
I'm not actually sure what muscle groups that's working either do.
The reverse shrug.
Well, I mean, what is even going on there?
It's yeah, answers on a postcard.
Well, would it not be a more isolated shrug?
Like you're not relying on any involvement.
Yeah, you're doing a shrug.
Right now I'm thinking, I'm thinking, I'm shrugging at the same time.
That's really, really interesting.
I'll have to have a bit of a play.
People listening to this podcast, go give it a shot.
Let us know, yes.
Absolutely.
So yeah, I mean, I think ultimately what we're looking for then is genuine kind of trapezius
exercises and genuine directors exercises and then anything else that we think might be relevant.
I mean, you know, fundamentally if you're looking at someone from the back, there's going to be RE
adults in there as well.
I mean, RE adults do get very, very effectively trained by Savage to plane pulling.
So most people, most of the time, that's already going to be covered.
But if somebody wanted to do RE adult flies and they could do that silver era style just with
dumbbells, you know, incline bench, or they could do it, you know, in a machine situation.
Either way it's going to be fine.
But most of the time I probably wouldn't start with that.
But then back to specialisation, you know, Why not put it in?
So with degree adults, a question I see floating around is, well, if we say that it makes most sense
to do an exercise that uses the least amount of musculature possible so that we can bias more of the
muscle we're trying to use with that logic not applied to rear delts in something like it said
you're playing row, we do not want to use.
Yeah, so someone.
But the issue is that the rear delt does actually have the best leverage for that movement.
Irrespective of the fact that we call a lat exercise, the rear delt actually has priority in moment
on terms.
Yeah.
So that's an important distinction and that's that's why a lot of so.
If you're looking if you're looking for a muscle group to apply the single joint protocol 2, it
would probably be the lap first because that's the one that has worst leverage.
In that scenario, you're more likely to Max out your rear delt than you are your thoracic lap in the
search to blame pool.
Yeah, I'm trying to think of it as the same way to summarize or to explain that if anyone's not
keeping up, can you contrast that to like when, when would we say, OK, so if we were to talk about
like when we would normally talk about biasing in particular muscle, we might say something like
like what?
Maybe.
Yeah, boy, flex was right.
And so we would say, well, if you're doing, you know, supinator versus pronator, you're going to get
more drac, more bracaradialis and more biases braca depending if it's supinator or pronated.
And in a situation like that, if you're just doing a standard curl, you've kind of got fairly
somewhat equal ish activation of both Bracky, Brackery, Alice and Weiss's bracky.
So we're saying because there's like relatively equal contribution or relative sort of leverages of
both of these, you want to push one to an extreme.
What you're saying in the in the row is the redoubt is already pushed to the extreme and so you
don't need to bias it because technically it's sort of being biased anyway.
Well, yeah, I mean, I wouldn't go as far as to say that you don't need to.
I mean, it depends on your goals and you know what you kind of what your tolerances are for MOTU
recruitment laws.
What I'm saying is that the out of the muscles that you're using in that particular exercise.
The rear delt is going to be at the top of the list in terms of how much recruitment it's achieving.
Your thoracic latter is going to be one step down from that.
So logically if you were then thinking about including a single joint exercise in your program to
supplement that exercise, that multi joint exercise, you would naturally choose one that targets the
thoracic Latin, not one that targets the rear delt.
So I think yeah.
And there's absolutely nothing wrong with having a programme that has some kind of pullover in it
and and then also having some rear adult work.
I mean, I mean like there's some really great maximalist type approaches that I was just joking
about earlier.
But what I'm saying is, I wouldn't automatically, if I'm writing a poem automatically just start
throwing in rear adult flies if I've already got a social plane row, because logically I would.
Actually, if I were to supplement something, it would be for the lat, not for the red out.
Yeah.
And in the same way someone wanted to like if they go with some maximize biases Draci growth then or
biases Draci, Tony picked me up on, on on pronunciation.
But then you could say, well, a, a unilateral version of a supernated curl then would probably be
the way to do that.
So, you know, there's always ways to further push into biasing a particular muscle or maximizing
activation in that muscle.
But you know, to your point, the rear dots, I want to use the word bias, obviously not bias per SE,
but you know, they're in, in the context of what's being used in that exercise, they are maximally
being used sort of within that sort of potential capacity for how much central motor command is
available.
So where does that land us?
Where are we at this point?
So we've talked.
So you're happy with the lat selection and you're saying we need to look at rear delts, we need to
look at traps kind of?
Having a bit of trap pieces is relatively straightforward.
I think it's just a shrug variation and as I say, from the literature that I've seen, doesn't really
seem to matter that much.
I mean, just to be clear, it's possible that, you know, over the next couple of years we get better
data regarding the relative activations of various regions of the beers.
And maybe there is, I mean that'd be fantastic because that would then give us more accurate kind of
ways of programming.
But maybe there is a way of pushing activation towards the upper, the middle, or the lower,
depending on what angle of pull you're using in a shrug or whatever other variable you might throw
at things.
But at the moment, the data I'm looking at suggests that it doesn't really seem to matter what shrug
variation you do.
You kind of get the same distribution of activation across all three trapezius regions.
So I would just throw in whatever stable, comfortable shrug variation works.
So basically, that's great, we understand rear delts, trapezius, no problem at all.
Erectus, the problem there is pragmatic.
It's not really knowing what to do because the erectors are only to really, there's only, they're
the only thing that does that thing.
So it's like, you know, you don't have to kind of go fiddling around trying to figure out how to get
the erectors to work because we know that spinal extension is what's going to kind of make the
erectors work.
But it's a complex selection of muscles and they are very clearly different thoracic and lumbar
extensors.
And generally speaking, a lot of people would regard, you know, exercises that involve spinal
extension, whether it's lumbar or thoracic, as having a high injury risk.
So you don't want to kind of go around, you know, sort of throwing ideas around and say I'll just do
this, this and this because, you know, potentially people might get hurt, but.
Do you have strong opinions on Jefferson curls?
So what do you mean when you say Jefferson curl?
The standing on a on a block, on plates and with a barbell.
Like in a dead left position and then fully flexed spine, stiff legs.
So basically what you're, what you're doing there is a combination again of hip extension with full
spinal extension including both lumbar and thoracic.
That's what I think you're describing.
Yeah, yeah.
So I wouldn't do it.
But yeah, I'm not sure what I can say now that won't get me into trouble.
Yeah, I wouldn't do it.
I'm so OK to be clear.
OK, So to be clear, I think that it's not easy to, to negotiate, to navigate the terrain in this
particular topic.
And, and I'm, I'm not saying Jefferson girls in particular, I'm saying where the fitness industry
identifies an exercise as potentially being high in injury risk, the navigating that terrain is not
easy.
So for example, there's a group of people, not a group of people.
There's, there's a tendency for people to say that dips are bad for you.
They they hurt you.
There's a tendency for people.
I mean, there's even a tendency for people to say squats and deadly.
So, you know, you can take it to an extreme if you really want to, but there's generally there's
kind of a you, you can kind of look at it as like a spectrum.
There's like exercises at one of the spectrum where you kind of get a lot of people saying that
exercise is going to hurt you.
I've imagined Jefferson girls are probably at the top end of that list.
Yeah, yeah.
Top spot as you kind of come back down the spectrum, you can kind of find exercises that a lot of
people would look at.
Oh, and you know, and you can put certain deadlift variations and good morning variations on there
as it dips often get people saying, you know, oh, they're dangerous, don't do them.
And you know, you can kind of bring it all the way down, as I say, to even barbell squats.
There'll be some people who will argue that they're, you know, kind of dangerous and you know, you
kind of continue going until you can find even some people who will say that strength training is
dangerous.
You know, there's a spectrum.
So basically this terrain that we're talking about now inadvertently is, you know, people have
opinions about the potential injury risks of strength training exercises.
And you can literally just have a spectrum upon which more and more people, as you go up towards the
left hand end of the spectrum, more and more people will point to take and go, no, no, that's
definitely going to hurt you.
And as you go towards the right hand end of the spectrum, fewer and fewer people will say that's
going to hurt you until we eventually get to strength training just as a thing.
And there'll be still some people in that category who say, Oh, no, no, no, no, strength training is
going to hurt you no matter how you do it.
OK, fine.
So there's this kind of terrain.
The problem we've got is that there's almost not.
There's not zero data, but there's almost no data about specific exercises being, you know, sort of
possessing an injury risk.
There's a little bit of data around powerlifting and injury risk.
There's a little bit of data around Olympic weightlifting and injury risk.
There's a little bit of data about recreational strength training injury risk, but it's really tiny
in comparison with what you might find in other circumstances for other types of activity.
So generally speaking, whenever you're in this terrain of talking about injury risk associated with
either strength training is a thing or specific strength training exercises, you are looking at a
vanishingly tiny amount of data and trying to extrapolate from that.
If you want actual injury risk data, if you want to kind of extrapolate based on, well, I think the
body does this and this exercise is making the body do something that I don't think it should do.
You're absolutely out on a limb there because that is really, really, really difficult case to make
because bio mechanical arguments for injury risk are very hard to make convincingly if you're
sitting on the kind of side of things of actually understanding bio mechanics.
I mean, sure, somebody can make an argument and they don't know what they're talking about, but it's
very, very hard to make those arguments.
Having said that, generally speaking, a lot of people will queue up and make an argument for loaded
spinal flexional extension as being problematic.
That is what it is.
What I'm saying is it's, it's a very, very difficult terrain to navigate and not just because of the
like emotional and because obviously some people will know somebody who maybe has hurt themselves.
So you can kind of end up in emotional territory quite quickly, but the just sheer absence of
information that's usable in those conversations makes it almost impossible to have a informed
conversation.
And you kind of end up just letting people just kind of say, well, this is my preconceived bias.
I'm like, OK, well, you keep that because there's not really anything I can say there's meaning for
that will change your opinion.
Or even I'm not even sure that I should change your opinion because what, What data do I have to
show you that is valid, that could reasonably, you know, in a valid way, move your opinion?
Do I feel comfortable even making that case?
Does that make sense?
It's like, on what basis would I even presume to change your opinion about something when I don't
have the data to make A, to make my own conviction feel valid to me.
So I think this terrain is just extraordinarily difficult to to negotiate.
And then when you then start to bring in the, the kind of the physiotherapy perspectives on things
where they say, you know, we really shouldn't make people feel like movements are inherently
dangerous because of the pain science kind of ideas.
And then you go, OK, well then I'm really, I'm going to keep my mouth shut then because I'm like,
you know, I potentially could actually make things worse by by commenting on this stuff.
So I, I genuinely, people ask me questions about injury risk and strength training all the time and
they go, is this exercise safe or is this exercise dangerous?
I'm like, I'm not even going to answer that question.
It's such a horrible area of study and it has so many ways that it can go wrong that I genuinely
just don't even feel able to.
It's not that I don't feel comfortable because I always talk for the last 10 minutes about it
because perfectly comfortable talking about it.
I'm I'm just saying I don't feel able to express meaningful opinions about this topic.
Yeah, that's fair enough.
It's interesting because like, you know, I look at it and I was like, well, OK, there's lumber
extension.
That's not well.
There you go.
You see, what you're trying to do is you're trying to navigate through this field by making some
biomechanical assumptions and then taking another step forward.
And it's like one of those.
It's like being in an Indiana Jones film where you kind of take a step forward and suddenly there's
arrows flying across, across the room and you, you know, you're going to end up getting stabbed by a
poisoned arrow.
It's just you can't navigate this terrain.
It's lethal.
It you can try and make some biomechanical assumptions, you go, well, you know, I think this is
valid and this is valid.
And then suddenly you're like, and now I'm stuck.
It's horrible terrain.
It's really horrible.
Yeah, I don't, I don't know anyone in the Silver era who used them.
I'm sure there was some, but I it feels like a bronze era kind of thing.
I wouldn't be surprised if people back there were.
Doing it.
Yeah.
OK.
So I don't know how we got on to that.
So you're asking me about ways of doing loaded spinal extension and I was kind of going, well, you
know, yeah, there's there's some kind of machines in the gym that will do that for you.
And you're asking me about silver era variations.
And I was like, well, really, I'll go back to what I said earlier, which is I think a seat of good
morning off, ideally in a squat right, where you can set the pins.
So the bar is something that you can kind of collect and then move and then leave back on the pins
again.
I think that's a great safety feature.
And potentially you could, I mean that lends itself to potentially either lumbar or thoracic.
So you could potentially do 2 separate exercises with that, you know?
Have you ever programmed to say to good morning?
I've done them.
I mean, I did that.
Sure, that's a different question.
I've done them, I've never programmed them.
So is that because you're putting them in the similar category as a Jefferson curl then?
No, I do think that the I don't want to make any any statements you.
See, this is this is the problem.
It's it's really difficult to have conversations about this stuff.
When I've done them myself, I have not felt like there was a chance of me injuring myself doing
them.
Yeah, I'd say no.
So that's not been my concern.
My concern, my no concern.
The reason would be I've doubted what is the necessity to do this.
And I must admit, I've never had a client come to me and tell me that they want to maximize their
erectors.
And so maybe that's why.
But maybe that's just not the language that someone's going to use because I do know that some
people do like the aesthetic of very developed reactors.
So it's interesting, like, you know, we're driving to a conclusion here as far as excise selection
goes for an exercise that presumably neither of us really give to many people.
And in fact, it's making me, you know, wonder, hey, should this be an exercise that we include in
our toolbox?
I think, I think generally though, there are potentially other options.
You know, I think that I mean fundamentally if you start with the premise that you can load either
either side in the same way when you're talking about or deadlift, not necessarily ideals, but
deadlift variations versus good mornings, the barbell is on one side of the body or the other.
I think genuinely the possibility of a holding a dumbbell and doing the same kind of exercise could
could potentially replace that.
So I think that's worth worth thinking about.
I think the problem we've got is that if you think about this just from a sociological perspective,
if I were to ask someone to do back extensions and hold a dumbbell against the kind of top of their
chest and allow the thoracic spine to just kind of flex slightly as they were doing the back
extension and as they came up to the top, I asked them to extend their thoracic spine at the top.
Most people would be pretty chill about that.
OK, But if I asked them to do that without the back extension bit completely lose their minds
because they'll be like, why are we doing loaded spinal extension?
I'm like, well, you were doing it before in the in the 45° back extension, but I was disguising it
behind the fact that it was a back extension because it's not really a back extension.
It's a hip extension, but we call it a back extension for unknown reasons.
And so it kind of starts to make you realise that a lot of a lot of the way that we think about
exercises is influenced by these kind of sociological kind of ideas or perspectives where people go.
That's appropriate in this scenario, but it's not appropriate in that scenario.
Like it's the same thing, you know?
So we're going to get to constructing a back workout in a moment.
Obviously we've given bits and pieces.
I'm just, it's interesting to me because I think where we're going to arrive is not where I expected
us to arrive in terms of excise selection.
So that's that's.
Intriguing.
Well I, I mean, I've been giving the same answer for the last year when people ask me on Instagram,
they say what would you do for a back worker?
And I say I would do a frontal plane pull down.
It's like a wide grip pull down.
I'd do a narrow grip row simply because I can't be bothered to do 2 pull downs.
So I'd want to do a row.
And I'd do a Kelso shrug because Kelso shrug is just simply the most convenient shrug variation and
the people say oh you could do it unless you could.
If you want to go and steal every single 45 LB plate in the gym, fine, go ahead and do standard
shrugs.
But honestly I'm this.
Cast machine could be a solution to that.
I hope so ahead of ourselves.
Yeah, I know.
True, true.
Hey, I do want to ask you with the vertical shrug, do you think if you were to do, if you were to
hold the bar behind your back, you're naturally going to be able to get a little bit more scalp
retraction?
I find that so uncomfortable.
Do you?
Interesting because I use it with some clients and some people I typically find.
To be honest, I typically find females don't like it because I have a butt that gets in the way and
most guys don't mind it.
Maybe you just have a big butt.
No, my butt doesn't get in.
It's my wrists that don't like it.
OK.
Which is generally the problem with most things that I struggle with.
It's normally my wrist.
Don't have a lot of mobility in my wrists and they're very small.
So you OK, So you actually notice it's worse if it's behind your back than if it's in front?
Interesting.
OK, that aside, let's say someone's risked mobility and whatever else was fine.
Do you think there's going to be?
I mean, you're going to tell me we don't have the data to know?
I don't know.
I mean, what do you want me to tell you?
I mean, if it's comfortable and you're loading it, I mean, cool.
I mean, that's ultimately where a lot of this kind of ends.
OK, So what about then in in the context of a Kelso?
I need to ask some of these questions so there are no people online want to know the answers.
If you were to do a Kelso with a closer grip sagittal plane compared to doing a Kelso with your arms
out wider, more transverse, is there any meaningful difference?
No data.
This is one of those things that, you know, be very cool if somebody would.
OK, so one of the most common questions that I get that is not training related is please tell me
what I should do for my PhD or Master's investigation.
OK, here you go.
Set up your surface electrodes correctly.
Don't follow the guidelines as written because you'll get it wrong.
Set up your service electors correctly and record activation for three different reasons of the
trapezius.
Then do different shrugging variations.
And you've, you've just given a great example of one possible comparison that you could do, which is
you could take the arm direction and you could be shrugging with a very wide grip and you could do
that horizontally, or you could do that but I guess vertically.
So there used to be a kind of, I believe some kind of deadly variation where they would hold the
outsides of the weight plates.
Yeah, was that Steve Gravesy did that?
And you could do a shrug in that position, or you could do a shrug in the kind of narrow grip
position.
So there you go.
There's one, there's one experiment.
Different width grips for your shrug, one very wide, one very narrow.
Alternatively different variations of directions.
So you could do shoulder width but horizontal shoulder width but maybe 45°.
Above the horizontal, 45°, below the horizontal and then maybe vertical and you could do all three.
I mean like there's a whole load of different trap kind of activation studies that could be done.
The issue that you're going to have at the end of the day is making sure that you get, So the in
this is another sociological comment.
Actually, generally speaking, when strength training focused researchers.
So like you've set out to do your PhD or your master's thesis and you're, you're thinking of
yourself as a strength training investigator.
So you want to work with strength training equipment.
So you start thinking about using barbells and stuff and you know that generally is going to lead
you down the path of not getting the data that you want.
And it's simply because what you need for activation studies to work is normalisation and
normalisation.
What you need is to make sure that you're using the same level of effort in all scenarios.
The easiest way of doing that is to use maximum efforts, obviously.
And the easiest way to do that is to use isometrics.
So basically what you would want to do is just set up your electrodes and then have people do 3 to 5
seconds maximum effort pulling each of the directions or test, you know, if you go on the route
saying, Oh no, no, no, I want to use actual strength training and dynamic movements.
OK, well, you're probably going to find standardization is now extremely difficult because you've
got to try and figure out how to make a, you know, 80% of Max in each of those different pulling
variations.
You're going to be around a very long time figuring that doable, really messy and 100% unnecessary
if you actually understand how muscular kind of contractions work.
So go down the isometric contractions route and it'll all work really, really easily and your
normalization and standardization will be really, really straightforward.
There you go.
So anyway, very quick diatribe on what would be a cool project for somebody to do or multiple people
to do I guess.
OK, so I guess where you're landing with the traps is you're saying we just don't have the data.
So at this point, pick any shrug you like, and if you wanted to add your ID by all means you can,
but you just have no way of knowing if it's doing anything different or not.
Totally.
That's a fair a fair summary.
No, that's where we are.
I mean, that's just kind of where we are, unless I'm missing something in the data, that's where we
are at the moment.
Now with the LATS, we've talked about the satiral plane work.
We talked about that kind of variation that Perry was using being like a sort of pullover type
thing.
You don't think that a pullover is necessary to add to a satiral plane row to target more pelvic
division?
Well, if you were if you were going down the route, well, OK, so how much more pelvic you're going
to get really is probably not that much more.
But technically maybe you could, you'd need to make sure that your peak effort was at the start of
the range of motion.
And again, there what you're now doing is pushing more stuff towards more activation towards coastal
PEC and try such packy long head.
So you it's it's messy that way of doing it.
I mean, yes, you are going in that direction.
But honestly, I would probably rely on frontal plane for the for the pelvic that the same way it's
doing the lumbar that and most of the time, you know, unless you were really kind of interested in
that specifically for some reason, OK.
So do we construct our work out now?
Is there anything else you want to?
Well, like I've been saying, I mean, I'm going to end up with my kind of Core 3 exercises, which is
the kind of frontal plane pull, the so to plane pull, whatever those two are and then the Kelsey
shrug or shrug variation, all we're really doing here is kind of talking around the possibility of
working some spinal rectal work in there.
That's all we're really adding.
You know, what's going to be controversial, I think to a lot of people is that I'm just not seeing
the value in any transverse plane pulling because ultimately my, my shrug variation is getting my,
my, my trap work pretty much nailed down.
I'm getting all the lat that I want from the, the two pulling variations.
And then if I'm going to add something else in, I'm probably going to be going down the route
saying, well, let's start talking about spine erectors.
What other people do is they say, well, let's talk about transverse plane rowing.
And I'm like, well, why, what are you getting from that?
Because it's, it's really just mostly rear delts.
And then they start talking about trapezes and I'm like, well, I'm getting way more trapezes than
you are through my shrug variation.
So if you were to program A, you got your frontal plane pull down and then let's say you did a
sagittal plane pull down as well.
So we've got 2 vertical pulls.
And then let's say you do a vertical shrug and then you add in whatever spinal react exercise you
want.
Well, I think that's where you could start making the argument because at that point you've got
nothing going horizontally and you can start say, well, you know, would it be better if I then had a
transverse plain row in there?
Whereas if you would.
But what you've done there is you've created a requirement for potential requirement for that extra
exercise.
And even then, I think it's not a shoo in.
Alternatively, if you genuinely had a narrow grip row and you can make sure that you actually have
potentially all those smaller muscles like rhomboids and things going on, definitely working there,
then I don't think you have much of a case to make for a a wide grip row, a transverse plain row.
I think it's one of the most overrated, overrated, overrated, overrated overrated exercises I can
think of, really.
So you you do still want to have some horizontal pull in.
I I think it hedges your bets, doesn't it?
I mean, you know it.
That means.
That's how I feel when I because sometimes I'm tempted because it's so convenient to program up
someone a wide grip pull up and then a narrow grip pull up.
I'm so tempted to just do that and leave it there and you know, do a trap exercise.
And I think that, well, is there something you're missing with a horizontal Rd. do like it's, is it
just going?
To yeah, I think it's hedging, hedging the bats scenario.
You know, I mean ultimately you if you were doing a Kelso horizontal Kelso shrug, then I think the
necessity of hedging the bats probably decreases.
Yeah.
Interesting.
Yeah.
But again, fundamentally, my starting point is wide grip pull down, narrow grip row, Kelso's drug.
And I really don't think you're going to get a better combination than those three.
Really all we're doing in my opinion today is talking about whether there needs to be a discussion
about spinal, rectal work.
And that again, it's like, well, some people who are potentially, you know, very strong squatters
and dead lifters, you may be like, well, value of that is probably pretty small because they've
taken their leg strength to the point where they're torso, their spinal extension strength has had
to move with it.
I mean, when I'm saying people obviously Take Me Out of context, I mean, I don't even know why I
bother actually to say this, you know, kind of oh, people Take Me Out of context or people just make
stuff up about me.
But that's beside the point.
People would Take Me Out of context here and say, oh, well, Chris says that squats and deadlifts
don't work spinal erectors, and that's nonsense.
Well, no, I'm not saying that.
I'm just saying that what will happen is that they will get worked, just they will lag the primary
muscles that are being trained in those exercises.
So you'll have to get your primary muscles to a strength level where it'll start pulling the
accessory muscles with it.
And that will happen over a long period of time.
If you wanted to move your, you know, spinal erector size and strength forward more quickly, you
wouldn't do it that way.
You would want to train them directly, so.
And obviously it's the other way is is the way that the Silviero guys were mostly doing it.
Yeah, sure.
But they were never really that focused on back as a thing.
I mean like.
Yeah, arguably Reg maybe was, but I don't think anyone else really over emphasized it today.
So, so I think really it just comes down to, you know, if people want that kind of look, then those
are the kind of exercises that I would be thinking about just bearing in mind that we've got this
just sociological mess associated with how people think of this type of exercise for this part of
the body.
People just like automatically assume that they're going to explode if they if they do exercise in
that category.
And we don't have the data to discern, you know, what the actual injury risks really are.
And you mentioned rhomboids and you said, hey, any horizontal exercise is probably going to be
enough there.
You don't think we need to?
I'm going off some very thin data and I say that, but yeah, I mean it just I just kind of from what
little EMDHI have looked at, I think probably horizontal is more likely to give you those extra kind
of small benefits there in that respect.
But again, just not really something where there's a lot of information.
And if someone didn't move into a more of a transverse plane, pull through rear delts, presumably we
might get a little bit more green Dell because we're taking out.
But honestly, at that point, why wouldn't you just do, you know, kind?
Of Reed out fly.
A Reed out fly.
I mean, that's the point.
This is what I say to people when they get really agitated about their obsession with, you know,
kind of transverse panel, you know, wide grip pulling.
And I'm like, why have you got that in your program?
And they're like reasons and I'm like, well, just do a Reed out fly and you'll get 90% of that
benefit that you're talking about and do narrow rows and you'll cover everything else.
You know what's the issue?
OK, OK.
We have arrived where I expected us to bar the spinal erected work then.
Well, that's the interesting bit.
I mean, that's why I kind of wanted to talk about that stuff because I think it's otherwise we just
kind of doing an hour long podcast about something that I've done a single story slide about a dozen
times and given the same answer.
And I also think, you know, the whole kind of, I think it's useful just to have, have that
conversation about injury risk constraint training, because I think there's a lot of opinions flying
around about injury risk and strength training.
And almost all of it is pretty much indefensible from a scientific point of view.
Now, I'm not saying it's wrong, I'm saying it's indefensible.
That's not the same thing.
So when I say it's indefensible, what I mean is there's no data.
Some of it may be right.
I, I just don't know.
And that's the issue.
I have one more question for you.
So activation levels in the back, is it worth looking at unilateral exercises?
If so, 'cause you know, this is a, a, a muscle group with unilateral exercises can be a little bit
more challenging, if not necessarily impossible.
But sometimes doing a unilateral exercise is not worth the juice, isn't worth to squeeze 'cause
you're losing stability or whatnot.
So are you using many unilateral exercises in people who or would you in people who want to maximize
back development?
So I think that there are categories of back exercises that do work relatively well, can work
relatively well unilaterally.
So if you imagine you've got a commercial gym that has these, how to describe them really?
I guess they're kind of like, we're not talking about cables here.
I'm talking about actually kind of fixed like high rose, I guess.
So it's a it's it's a solid piece of equipment.
There's no kind of, you know, giving it at all.
It's just kind of a long kind of beam and then a handle.
Well, they just sort of have a strange type ones and the ones you see like Dory and Hues and.
Like and you can get different angles of them and they pull in different directions and various
different people find different ones comfortable or uncomfortable whatever.
Those tend to have a lot pull down style seat with pads that you can fit your legs under and often
there will be enough metal around you to be able to grab hold of something with your other hand when
you're doing a single arm pull.
So generally speaking when I find an excised machine like that and it fits my dimensions, generally
speaking, I really like doing unilateral work on that kind of on that kind of equipment.
Really, really I would generally prefer to do that and I would do that in preference of doing 2 arms
at the same time.
So I think that category of back excise work.
Those machines by the by also are good for doing physiological drop sets for a back exercise because
they tend to see depending on the machine, some of them will have the weights, so I don't know if
you the ones you use do this so often.
The handles work in tandem, so you pull one handle.
Even if you're only pulling one handle, the other handle is still moving.
And so either you can easily just have the weight in that or a lot of the ones that are working
independent arms, then you can just if you use them bilaterally, but the independent arms, then you
can start alternating after you've hit failure with that.
So I tend to find that doesn't require sort of any change between going from bilateral to
unilateral.
I see.
So it's a practical kind of benefit.
Yeah.
I mean, the only ones that I tend to come into contact with are literally just plate loaded.
So yeah, they're just independent arms and it's literally just a a kind of counterweight that you're
putting on.
One side, yeah, the hammer strength ones, I think they're mostly all plate loaded.
There's like some Nautilus ones that are pin loaded, yeah.
Anyway, So yeah, they work well unilaterally.
I I think they're actually ones that I would, as I say, actively choose to do unilaterally even.
And you could do a Kelso with that as well, then unilaterally.
Yeah, I guess honestly I for comfort reasons, generally don't do shrugging unilaterally.
I tend to find that it causes me to over rotate, but yeah I mean if stabilization is not an issue
then it should be fine.
I don't do shrugging unilaterally, I don't even know if I've ever tried it, but I guess if someone's
goal is trap development, you could try it.
OK, and then and then erectus?
You can't do that.
That's not a thing.
I think that's all my bad questions.
OK, last one LA, I know I said last one before.
When it comes to shrugging, often you see people do silly 30 Rep sets, all that kind of thing.
And, and shrugs obviously is something you need to, I, I see either shrugs is something you need to
do very high reps with or there's something that you need to use heaps and heaps of momentum with
and you're just bouncing this super heavy load for a billion reps.
Obviously there's no need to do any of that.
Unlike, I mean, that's a given.
OK, we know there's no need to do any of that.
We know you can just train obviously the the trap in the same way you do anything else.
Is there not a need?
But is there anything that's not silly about doing that?
So in my mind, I'm, I'm looking at some of the stuff the silver area guys are doing and I'm
thinking, well, if you're able to use body English, you get to a point of the movement where then
the traps have better leverage.
Maybe there could be some utility to using a little bit of momentum?
Leverage.
Leverage only applies if there's other muscles that could be involved.
The same issue with spine erectus is the same issue with peers.
There's nothing else that can do it.
Yeah.
So if you're, if you've got a a sticking point in that lift, which is not where the traps are going
to be.
I mean, obviously this is less an issue if you're there.
Isn't anything else working, so it's irrelevant.
Well, yeah, if you're using a Kelso or something, but if you're if you're using like a like this
stiff leg deadlift shrug that we talked about the start or.
Something like that.
I see.
I see what you're saying.
But that's a good distinction.
OK, so if you're using an exercise where nothing else is is working, then it's like the.
Quadriceps, if you're doing a knee extension, you know, honestly, unless you're trying to sort of
move things around between the rec fem and the other quadriceps, we don't really know how that
works.
There isn't really anything you can do.
So like moving the peak force around through the range of motion, we don't really get any effect of
doing that because there's nothing else that can do the job.
Same thing applies to spinal rectors.
I mean spinal rectors got very, very marked kind of leverage curve with with joint angle, but it's
irrelevant because nothing else that can do the job.
Yeah, so again, it would only be relevant if you were using some kind of hip extension exercise for
the sake of erectors.
And it would only be applicable to the hip extensors.
Yeah.
So yeah, I mean, yeah.
OK.
Yeah.
So I guess excise by excise basis, but if you are picking an exercise where the.
Traps or the erectors or whatever, the only things that are working.
Then it becomes a redundant conversation.
OK.
Totally.
OK, that's that's it for my back questions.
Anything you wanted to finish on No.
Not really.
As I say, I've kind of had a fairly kind of fixed idea of what I thought a solid back routine would
be built around for quite a long time.
And yeah, I've never really kind of actively thought about including spine erectors in there.
But you know, logically it is a part of the back.
So, you know, if you wanted to be complete then it would have to go in.
Whether or not it genuinely does need to go in, and most people do teens is a separate question
because as I say, most of your hip extension stuff is naturally going to load that just more slowly
over a long period of time.
So I think it really just comes down to being a small group of people in a small set of scenarios
where it's going to be worth thinking about.
But again, you know.
They're in one of those fifty set workouts where you're trying to asslave everything.
I imagine that they've probably got two or three X-ray exercises in there for back already.
I don't know.
I don't.
I don't spend a lot of time on social media, so I don't, I don't know exactly what's going on, but
there you go.
Well, if you guys have some reactive exercises, tag us.
Let us see what they are.
If you give the standing calf rays, trap rays, shrug, exercise a go, then tag us and let us know.
I think that's, that's our only homework for the week and I'm going to go give it a go myself
anyway, hopefully that was helpful for some of you guys who wanted to learn a little bit more about
maximizing back development.
Like I said, this was a requested topic.
A few other people said, hey, can we cover other muscles as well?
So we will intermittently be feeding in or slotting in another muscle at some point.
You've got what have you got so far?
Arms, glutes, back.
That's it.
Now I.
Think so.
I think that's it so far, yeah.
Anyway, guys, thank you again for joining us, and we'll be back next week with a new topic.