Episode: 008 Training Frequency - what to consider if you want to train every day
URL: https://open.spotify.com/episode/7IqjSs55n4EinE4ZbW2OCc
Published: 2025-07-13
================================================================================

And welcome back to another episode of Hypertrophy, past and present.
Chris, how are you today?
I'm doing well, thanks Jake.
Not feeling the absolute best.
Got a bit of a cold as you can hear, but other than that doing well.
You are.
You sound pretty good.
I know you sounded a little bit snuffy before, but so far you sound fairly well.
So hopefully, hopefully you hold up OK today we have.
So obviously we normally, well, I normally introduce us to a silver era workout plan.
And we did discuss in our first episode kind of these different areas.
I talked about the drones era, which was sort of obviously before the silver era.
And this was where there was more like, I guess strong men and kind of more like circus lifts and
bodybuilding was sort of becoming a thing.
But there weren't any sort of really dedicated bodybuilding shows or some, but they're a little bit
different though, more than this performance type thing.
And it's not, that's not really the era that we focus on that heavily.
Obviously it was pretty steroid.
So there's still some interesting things.
But you know, even there the aesthetics were a little bit different.
We've talked about that and obviously there's a big performance nature to it.
Now today I do want to go back in time to the Ground Zero.
I do want to talk about a particular figure who is perhaps, I would argue probably the second most
well known figure of that time, a guy named George Hackenschmidt.
Now, what I do find interesting about George, if you look up George Hackenschmidt, the dude was
absolutely jacked.
Massive, massive guy.
Now, he was also a wrestler.
He was known as a Russian lion and a performer.
But certainly, you know, for all intents and purposes, A bodybuilder as well, even though we didn't
have the classy bodybuilding shows that we have now.
Now, interesting thing with George Hackenschmidt is, and obviously this is really early on, we're
talking, you know, 1900, very early 1900s.
And he did write, he did write a book, I believe it's called the The Way to Live, I think something
along those lines.
And he does talk about not just exercise, but he talks about, you know, eating and he talks about
healthy habits.
And the interesting thing with George Hackenschmidt is, is in the way that he trained, it was quite
different to what we see in the silver era, and not just in terms of exercises.
So exercises were obviously different as well, or the Drone Zero exercises were, you know, that more
sort of strongman style.
But even the methodology in which he actually trained was quite a lot different to the other plans
we've talked about so far.
So I thought it'd be a good example of something a little bit different, something a little bit
outside the box for us to talk about.
Now, as is kind of the case of some of these guys or some of these plans is a, there's a little bit
of, I guess, ambiguity.
I've mentioned this in the past where they don't always explicitly say this is exactly what we do.
This is exactly how often we do it.
This is exactly the repetitions we use and all that.
Sometimes they give more details, sometimes less.
And with George Hackenspitt's training plan, he gave I, I guess, sort of medium amount of detail.
So he does tell his is exactly his progression model, but he does leave a little bit to the
imagination.
So the interesting thing here is he does talk about training most days.
He does talk about doing exercise every day, but it's a little bit unclear whether he's suggesting
doing the weight training every day or most days of the week.
But it's it's very obvious that he is certainly insinuating that one should be training with weights
at least most majority of the days of the week.
So that's interesting in and of itself.
We're talking probably 5 or 6 days a week, maybe even seven days a week weight training.
Now in order to do that, he recommends a very specific progression model and he says each exercise
should be done.
Well, he doesn't exactly say one set.
That's just assumed because they were all using one set back then.
So it's one set and what you would do is start with your 10 repetition Max load and you would do 5
repetitions with it and you would add 1 repetition each workout 56789 and you go to 10.
And once you hit 10, you would add load, you would go back to five and you'd go again.
So fairly nice.
I mean this is nice and this is we're talking, you know, early 1900s and they had such a nice
progression model back then.
And as far as the exercise is going, again, there's a, you know, it's a little bit vague in terms of
which exercises he would do each time, but he does talk about some of the exercises he liked.
And we're talking things like, well, actually I should mention like the hack squat.
So Hackenschmidt invented the hack squat.
Now, obviously, you know, we're not talking machine hack squat.
We're talking barbell hack squat where it was kind of like a, almost like a combination of a
deadlift and a squat where you would have the bar behind your back.
So he would do things like hack squats.
He would do things like one arm presses.
He would do like variations of like a snatch exercise.
He would do like a wrestler's bridge type exercise, which was kind of like almost like a hip thrust,
but you would actually go up on your neck instead of just pushing your hips in the air and whatever.
He was also doing several different shoulder type exercises like raise, dumbbell raises and curls.
So again, the exact exercise selection is a little bit vague, but this concept of doing one set low
repetitions, you know, presumably a little bit away from failure.
If you're starting with a 10 room and you're doing A5 Rep Max and you're increasing one Rep per day.
So presumably holding you that little bit in reserve and doing that most days of the week.
It's an interesting method, isn't it?
Yeah, I mean, the, the numbers are not lost on me.
I mean, it's, it's really interesting that, you know, historically we've thought about stimulating
reps as being probably the last five reps of a set.
And so you know, when Hackenschmitt is saying, well, let's take a 10 Rep Max and do, you know, 5
reps in the first workout and then, you know, obviously go for six in the second.
Obviously that, that first workout is, is obviously just like a, you know, designed to, you know,
familiarize you with the exercise probably isn't doing anything really other than improving
coordination a little bit.
And then you kind of, you know, you go in and you do your sort of 6 and your seven, your 8:00 and
you're doing some stimulating reps.
And so obviously by the time you get to your 10, maybe the 10 hopefully has moved up a bit and it's
now maybe you're using an 11 or a 12 Rep Max instead of a A10.
So you perhaps spend a lot of time working with a couple of stimulating reps You're probably not
getting, oh, you're obviously not getting anywhere near 5 at any point, but you're also probably not
getting those last couple of reps of the set, the two that would produce post workout fatigue.
And obviously this is something we can come back to and, and dig into later on when we talk about
the, the Physiology side of it.
But what it looks to me is that he's actually got a very elegant progression model, which is
allowing him to work with a couple of stimulating reps per day per exercise or per muscle group.
But he's never really getting to the point where he's training with those last two reps of a, of a
moderate load set, which would give you post workout fatigue.
It's it's a very, very well put together progression model.
And, you know, this is I think people think that I'm maybe overstating things when I say, honestly,
if you want to really understand, you know, really good strength training practices, go back to
these guys, bronze and silver era before anabolics came in, because they had pretty much all the
best ideas and they didn't have any of the anabolics creating problems for them when they were
trying to figure out what worked because they weren't obviously there at the time.
So they got the the clarity.
Everybody was working with the same, you know, from the same sort of starting point and making the
same kind of observations.
But I really like this progression model and I think it does exactly what you would want it to do in
the context of a daily training program where you're training the same muscle group every single
day.
It's.
Interesting because obviously a lot of people talk about, well, I'd say obviously some people maybe
don't know, but there's a lot of people talking about at the moment, is it possible to train every
day, train the same muscle each day?
And there's not a lot of data on there, is there?
Like we don't have a lot of studies or we don't have any studies where they've sort of done that
from a hypertrophy perspective, have they?
So I think there are a couple of rather strange muscle damage type studies.
From memory, there might be one or two where people have done like eccentric contractions every day
for, you know, a couple of weeks.
And what generally tends to happen in those scenarios is that you get a little bit of adaption over
the first kind of week or so and then it plateaus and you don't really see any other changes after
that.
And of course, you know, it's because you're dealing with an incredibly muscle damaging type of
exercise.
And so you accumulate fatigue to the point where you're unable to recruit many of the high threshold
motor units and you're unable to produce very much single fibre force with the fibres that are
activated.
And of course that means you're not getting any stimulus for hypertrophy.
I mean, ultimately that's the problem with accumulating fatigue is that it stops you from triggering
the adaptations you're trying to trigger.
I think that's really important point just to emphasize is that, you know, people sort of will say,
oh, you make too fuss about fatigue and you know, you, you everybody has to get fatigued.
It's the cost of, you know, kind of doing business if you want to, you know, make sort of the
adaptations happen.
Well, yes and no.
You, you do expect to see a little bit of fatigue in many situations.
You don't necessarily need it, as Hackenschmidt's program is showing.
I mean, it certainly doesn't contribute positively.
It's just as you know, people correctly say it often is just a cost of doing business.
But if you start to accumulate that fatigue and you start to reduce the ability to recruit mode
units and you start to reduce the amount of single private force by calcium I'm related fatigue
mechanisms, you are not going to be able to make that program continue to produce the adaptations
you want it to do.
So I mean, ultimately that is the problem with accumulating fatigue.
And I think it's a really nice sort of demonstration, this hack and Schmidt program of exactly how
you might.
And there's other solutions as well, but this is one of those examples of how you might go about
constructing A progression model that keeps you in a zone where you're getting some stimulating reps
every day, but also you're not going into that last two reps of the set of a moderate load, which
would cause post workout fatigue.
Yeah.
So when I get this question from people I, the place I land is I kind of think, well, I don't have
any research to fall back on.
I can't show you a study that shows you that this works.
And I think that that's maybe become the default from a lot of people to say, well, therefore don't
do it.
And the answer I give is, well, I don't know.
I don't have anything to show you except I know that George Hackerschmidt was jacked.
Like look at this guy before.
The story is obviously end of one, but a lot of the grand era guys were doing stuff every day.
You know, Sandown was doing stuff every day as well, and these guys had no issue building muscle, so
clearly there's got to be some way of making this work.
Oh, absolutely.
And I think you raise a really good point there, which is that there's this tendency in the modern
sort of science based lifting community to say that if there's not a study that shows it, it's not
it's not a thing, it's not really, it's not.
It doesn't happen and say, well, no, that's not how how science works.
Science seeks to test hypotheses about things.
But just because, you know, if there's no data about something, it doesn't mean that it's not a
thing.
It just means that there's no data about it.
You know, you can't say, oh, well, there's no, there's no study, therefore it's not real.
It doesn't happen, it's not a thing.
So we'll know.
It just means there's no data.
And that's why really I think it makes so much more sense to start from a physiological perspective
and say what's happening physiologically?
Do we think this is possible?
I mean, obviously we're going to go on and talk about this question, but, you know, do we think it's
possible, you know, to train a muscle every day?
And what are the, the advantages and disadvantages and how might that kind of piece together?
But yeah, there's this kind of tendency in, in, in, in the science based lifting community to kind
of say, well, if there's not a study showing that it happens, we can, we can just say it's, it's not
happening.
Well, no, that's, that's not the right way around.
It just means that there isn't any data.
So as you rightly point out, we can go back and look at history instead.
And you know, we can make make use of that data.
And I'd honestly rather do that then then look at the sort of sections of the the fitness industry
that have been contaminated by the experiences and observations of people who've been using
anabolics for 50 or 60 years.
Yeah, so that's the goal of this podcast.
Let's talk about, you know, understanding that we do have some limitation in in, I guess in data,
like you said.
But based on a physiological model and understanding how this stuff works, what might it look like
if someone wanted to effectively train every day?
And like you said, what might be some of the pros and what might be some of the cons?
Well, before I answer that question, let me just give a couple of background blocks of information.
So I'm just going to talk a little bit about the stimulus period and what we know about that and
what data exists and what we can and can't say based on the myofibular protein synthesis rate
elevations and things like that.
And then secondly, talk a little bit about what we know about post work advert, although to be
honest, I've kind of already kind of summarized that.
So when we are thinking about training with a very, very high frequency like training a muscle every
day, we obviously want to know as much as we can about the duration of the stimulus period.
Now the reason we want to know that is because there is a limit on how high you can push muscle
protein synthesis rates or myofibrillar protein synthesis rates before they just kind of cap out.
Now clarity, when we say muscle protein synthesis, what we're referring to is any muscle protein.
So the, the study is set up to look at the any, any, any sort of muscle proteins, which of course is
very less, much less precise than looking at myofibrilla proteins.
And of course, myofibrilla protein synthesis is looking very specifically at the myofibril kind of
fraction.
So generally speaking, we tend to regard myofibular protein synthesis as being a more specific
indicator of hypertrophy.
It's not different from muscle damage repair.
So if if we look at muscle protein synthesis rates, you'll see that those are elevated after
damaging situations even if they're not related to exercise.
And you'll see the same thing with myofibular protein synthesis rate to elevation.
So what you can't do is say oh, well, it's myofibular protein synthesis rates.
Therefore it doesn't include damage.
It absolutely does.
They both, they both deal with damage as well as with hypertrophy.
So we've got these two kind of a measurement sort of measurements that we can take. 1 is an
elevation in the muscle protein synthesis, 1 is elevation in the myofibular protein synthesis.
So, so basically, we tend to use these elevations in these rates as an indicator of the stimulus
period.
And it's not horrible, but it's not perfect either for reasons we'll get into in a minute.
But ultimately what we're saying is that leaving measurement issues aside, we kind of want the
muscle protein synthesis rate to come back down a bit from its very high level before we stimulate
it again.
Now, this is a really, really important point and this gets very confusing for people.
The reason we're saying this is because if you've say, done a workout on a Monday and then you come
back in on a Tuesday at the same time of day and you do another workout with the same muscle.
Then after your workout on Monday, you stimulate the elevation in either Myops, my fibrillar
proteins into this or muscle proteins into this, whichever one you're measuring.
And it will have jumped really high really, really quickly and it'll start coming down again
probably after about sort of 8 to 12 hours.
And the question then is if I've still got an elevation present the following day, what does that
mean for me in terms of the stimulus that I can generate with the second worker?
Well, what it means is that if you're, I mean, in the scenario, for example, that my OPS or NPS was
sort of maintained at a really high level all the way through that 24 hour period and it was still
really high at the start of the second workout.
What that would mean is that you would not really be able to push my OPS any higher from that second
workout.
So your second workout would essentially not do anything because you've already got a maximum level
of my OPS or MPs from the previous stage workout.
Now, that's not the way the curves are.
You know, that's not the shape of the curves.
The curves are coming down rapidly after about 12 hours and they're coming right down to probably
about sort of 25% ish.
I forget the exact percentages of what your peak was previous day.
Now just kind of running with that for a moment, that random number I just pulled out of my head.
If you were to be at 25% of your peak, you know of the previous day, then essentially you wouldn't,
you would, you would expect that you'd get about 75% of your previous days benefit by doing another
workout.
So you're, you're losing something by not getting my OPS or MPs back down to that base level
following day.
And that's the essence of the problem that we're talking about when we talk about my OPS and MPs
rates still being elevated from the previous day.
I think some people when they ask me questions, they go, why do we need to get MPs or my OPS back
down to baseline before we elevate it and we don't.
You absolutely don't need to get it.
What we're saying is that you lose something because your peak that you got the previous day was
your maximum amount that you could elevate to.
You've got a certain capacity for increasing the rate.
You can think of muscle fibers basically like having these little manufacturing kind of engines or
or machines in them that sort of spit out proteins and they're making these and you elevate the
speed at which they make them, the rate at which you make these proteins.
So when we say we're elevating the rate of myofibrilla or muscle protein indices, we're saying that
these machines are kind of pumping out proteins at a faster rate and that's then aggregating and
accumulating inside the fiber and making the hypertrophy happen.
All the muscle damage repair happens.
We'll talk about in a minute.
But ultimately, if you bring that down to a level which is say 25% of your peak, then you can still
move from that 25% to the 100%.
You've got the 75% there.
So you're not losing completely the benefit of that second workout, but you are reducing a part of
the advantage, part of the benefit you get from the second workout because you can't bring things
all the way back down to baseline.
So summarizing what I'm saying is that you don't need to get things 100% back down to baseline.
You do kind of need to accept that you might lose a little bit of the stimulus that you would have
got from that second workout if you start that second workout while you've still got NPS or my Apps
elevated from the previous day.
So this is really important because I do see a lot of people get this confused and there's AI would
say a very dominant narrative online that says you, you must wait until NPS is back at baseline
before you can train again.
And it seems to be, it seems to be presented in a way that's different.
What you've just said there where the insinuation is you will get no benefit unless NPS or my OPS is
back at baseline.
And what you said is no, no, it's just not additive.
So you can't go in and say, well, you've, let's say doubled my OPS in in one workout and now it's
back down to say 50% above baseline.
And you're just saying we can't just add another 100% top of it.
You're saying you can just go back to the peak that it was.
So the analogy that that I guess I would sort of a metaphor I'll come up with there is like imagine
you've got 10 employees and you set all 10 employees to do work and then five of them knock off.
Well, when you stimulate an NPS again, you don't just get 10 new employees, you get those 5 back
again.
So you can't just add another 10 onto it and get 15, but you're saying you can still go back to that
peak?
Yeah, exactly.
Basically, you've got a peak that you can reach.
And you know, that peak is very, very pointy in the first kind of 12 hours.
I mean, you can see this from the the MPs data most clearly.
It jumps really high in the first kind of 12 hours or so and then it starts flying back down again.
So obviously by the time we get to the following day, we are not at the peak and there therefore is
a possibility of creating.
And this is really the conclusion that I, I would come to is that if you just go and look at some of
these diagrams of what MPs and my OPS does post workout, you will see that it spikes in the 1st 12
sort of 18 hours.
And it's coming down by the time you get to, you know, the kind of the 24 hour mark.
So there is clearly a capacity to push it back up again.
You're not going to get the 100% benefit, as you say, because you know, you've got that sort of
residual effect kicking around, you know, and that residual effect is also going to be doing muscle
damage repair.
And that's, and that's, that's a really important point as well because we don't really know.
I mean, realistically, we should be imagine that, you know, if you, if you're repairing muscle
damage, then you probably not able to, you know, use that.
I mean, you're not able to use that elevation in MPs or my OPS for the purposes of, you know,
hypertrophy.
So it probably does occupy your employees or your machines in the same way that the hypertrophy
processors do.
I kind of, you know, it's kind of like you've got your 10 employees as you sort of explaining and
you've got maybe sort of five of them occupied from the previous day, still processing the maps from
the previous day.
So you've now only got 5 that are able to then give you some benefits today from the work that
you're doing.
But then maybe if two of those are tied up doing HR work, which is you kind of muscle damage repair,
then you've now only got 3.
So this is one of those issues where you can say, well, if I and again, coming back to Acken
Schmidt's protocol, you know, it's really cool to see that it's explicitly designed to produce
actually a relatively small stimulus everyday, but also not really produce any damage repair.
You don't need damage repair if you don't produce damage.
And if you're missing the last two reps off of your set, then you're probably not going to get any
damage.
So that's a really, really nice kind of sort of connection with what we're seeing happening
physiologically, which is that if you do create muscle damage, then you will produce quite a long, I
mean, the Myops MPs rate elevations where you've got muscle damage.
They really do kind of just sort of tick along at a above baseline level, sorry, about 2530% level
for a long period of time.
So if you kind of do 3 or 4 sets to failure, you know, and you were trying to make that work in the
context of a daily kind of routine, which it wouldn't.
But you would find that you would just be constantly stuck with my OPS and MPs sitting at like that
sort of thirty, 4050% of a based on all the time just doing damage repair processes.
And it wouldn't then allow you to then use any of that my OPS or MPs for the purposes of
hypertrophy.
And presumably that would accumulate in successive workouts and.
Then and of course you'd also get fatigue.
I mean this is a separate concept from fatigue accumulation.
I mean fatigue accumulation is stopping you creating the stimulus in the 1st place.
This is what I'm saying here is just talking about tying up your machines or your employees in terms
of producing this protein that you're trying to add to your muscle fibers.
If you're constantly repairing damage, then you're tying up the resources that you want to use for
hypertrophy to do damage repair.
Now, I know that when, as we put this out, there's going to be a lot of people being like, no, you
can't.
You can't train every day.
And I know one of the arguments is going to come up because I've heard it a lot, is that there's a
some kind of refractory period where you can't stimulate NPS again, Are you?
There's nothing to suggest that that will happen from training.
So there's a couple of really nice rodent studies that show that if you try and stimulate
hypertrophy, I think it's 8 hours after a previous workout, nothing happens.
I mean, one of the really interesting things about that those studies is that, and I use those all
the time to make a point, which is that you can't use signaling data to make sense of of hypertrophy
because if you look at the signaling data, the signaling data tells you that you're stimulating
hypertrophy.
In those situations, you know, you do the workout and you get all of the mtor signaling and
everything all the way through to P70S, OK?
And everyone's go, Oh yeah, you know, that's telling me we're experiencing hypertrophenol.
OK, what?
Why aren't you getting a Myop straight innovation after the end of that signaling pathway then?
And they kind of make up an excuse and they stop talking to you because ultimately it's because
we've got a blocking situation there that's preventing you from converting that signal into a
hypertrophy stimulus, you know, an elevating my OPS.
So yeah, I think there is a period of time in which, you know, you can't stimulate another work and
I, I, I sorry, you can't stimulate another about another sort of elevation in my OPS in the same
muscle room.
And I, I often refer to that when people are saying, well, can I, you know, do some of my workout in
the morning and some of my workout in the evening for the same muscle.
And I'm like, no, you probably can't.
That's one of the things you really probably can't do.
I would be much happier if you just did it every day than doing it either end of the day because I
think that's the kind of scenario where you are going to hit this period of time in which you've got
this barrier.
The nature of that barrier is a separate question and there's all kinds of interesting things that
you said about that.
And I don't want to go there today, but I think that's definitely not the case.
If you go the full 24 hours, I think you go the full 24 hours.
It's just gone by that point.
We're back to a reset sort of state and all we're really dealing with then is what have, what have I
got going on in terms of my OPS rate elevations or NPS rate elevations?
You know, am I back down the baseline?
Am I at 25 percent, 30% ish or am I all the way up at the top level that I was, you know, at the
peak the previous day?
Well, you're not going to be at the peak the previous day.
You are going to be probably somewhere around the 20, thirty, 40% mark.
So you're going to find that you've got a less effective stimulus and I'm not denying that.
So let's be totally clear, you are going to get a slightly less effective stimulus than if you let
my UPS come all the way back to baseline.
But there's nothing magical about getting all the way back down to baseline.
Absolutely not.
You can just take the hit and say, well, you know, OK, I don't get 2030% that I was trying to get,
you know, but I'm training more regularly.
So I'm win them some, I lose some.
You know, there's, there's a, there's a downside and an upside.
So, you know, there's definitely, it's important to say that you know, there's magical about coming
all the way back down to baseline.
You are just accepting that you're losing something.
I do need to ask some short people listening are thinking now, OK, you said you can't train 8 hours
later, so how long?
Like if you were to do a, there seems to be a resurgence of very, very, very long workouts.
And I'm hearing some people now talk about 3 to 4 hour workouts, which blows my mind.
But I'm sure those people listening to this will be thinking, holy moly, what's happening?
Even if it's a four hour gap, if you're saying an 8 hour gap might work, do you know what the the
the short end of that timeline is?
No, not really.
I mean, I would say it probably is around that 3 or 4 hour mark.
I think if we look at if we look at what's, I mean, essentially you kind of you, you do, you do the
workout and then you look to see where various events start to happen.
And I mean, ultimately what we're looking for is the inflammation and the oxidative stress that's
tend to sort of start developing the post workout period.
Now you can look at studies and they'll show some of that starting to kick off around the three hour
marks.
Some studies show more like 6 hours.
And then you kind of like, well, you know, I've got some human data, I've got some animal data.
How different is all of that?
And it's like, honestly, I wouldn't want to put a number down.
I mean, I'm, I'm relatively confident that if you're doing them at the opposite ends of the day, you
know, morning and then the evening, I think you're probably well into the territory where you're
going to have a problem there.
If you're just doing a really long workout and you, you know, like Doug Hepburn used to do, you
know, kind of playing golf between, between squats, sets of squats, you know, I think those are kind
of the interesting sort of sort of situations really like you kind of probably pushing up against
the limit of what you can do.
How many people are really doing that?
I don't know.
But I think if you were to say, you know, 3 hours, you're probably OK, then I don't think that's
going to be wildly wrong.
I think if people are going much over 3 hours, then I think they're probably into dangerous
territory.
But honestly, if you're doing a three hour workout, you're not training every day.
No, that's true.
And you're also probably not doing the the same muscle at the start and end of that workout.
That'd be an odd way of.
Exactly, exactly, exactly.
So, you know, it's, it's probably a little bit irrelevant for what we're trying to talk about at the
moment.
So if there's not a significant refractory period the following day and you're saying you can still
increase MPs even or Myops, even if it was even, you know, there's still a bit of an elevation.
So we're saying, again, the way my head works here, the metaphor, I think he is, imagine you were,
you know, being paid $200.
You could be paid 200 bucks a day, but you can't work successive days or you can get paid $150.00
and work successive days.
That feels to me what we're saying.
You're not going to get the same impact in terms of stimulus, but you're still getting a decent
stimulus.
So you're still able to, if you do things right the way George Hackman did.
That seems like it could be a worthwhile payoff or trade off.
So.
Yeah.
I wouldn't say that we're comparing apples and apples there.
So the reason I say that is because if you were to construct a standard full body three times a week
program or every other day program, then you would probably be doing two or three sets.
Yeah.
So if you're doing a single, yeah, OK, true, Yeah.
So you're, you know, you kind of got to elevate your, your, your, sort of your $200 a little bit
there.
And it's no longer 200.
It's probably more like 300 or so.
So that, then that then starts to make it a little bit more probably similar in the sense that if
we're doing daily training, we're probably not even getting a full set.
I mean, if you look at Hackenschmidt, he's not getting a full set of stimulating reps.
He's probably getting 3 stimulating reps Max.
So again, you're discounting back again off your one set.
It's probably not one set.
It's probably more like, you know, sort of half a set or a bit more than half a set maybe.
So I think really it probably is a little bit closer to the three sets three times a week or three
sets every other day that we've kind of settled into being the probably default solution for most
people most of the time.
You know, So I don't think, I mean, because I get people saying, oh, well, you know, if I put one
set today in the weekly net stimulus model, I get, you know, a superior result from, you know,
training 3 three times a week or 3.5 * a week.
Yeah, you will do.
Can you really do that though?
You know, and as we pointed out at the beginning of this podcast, there's no data to tell you
whether that's doable or not.
We're just kind of looking at Hackerschmidt's protocol today and saying, you know, what's he doing?
He's not doing full set.
He's not he's missing off the reps of the last the last two reps of the set at least, if not more.
And he's avoiding those because he doesn't want to end up with post workout fatigue accumulating
both for the reasons that we'll, you know, probably talk about shortly, but also for this probably
fact that he doesn't want to have a constant elevation of my OPS and MPI mean obviously he's not
thinking this, but you know, he doesn't want it, doesn't want elevations in MYOPS or MPs to be
spilled over.
Because if you look at the MPs curve for one set and if you look at the MPs curve for three sets,
you get a very clear increase in the magnitude of the MYOPS from the three sets compared to the one
set.
And that increase in the magnitude in the first kind of 24 hours pretty much explains the extra
hypertrophy that you get from that three sets.
And multiple people have observed that, myself included.
And yet you also get a long tail from the three sets that you don't get from the one set.
And people are going, oh, well, you know, we can argue now that three sets allows a longer duration
of my observation there for a longer stimulus period.
Well, no, you can't because you've already had the benefit of the extra volume, you know, causing
hypertrophy in the 1st 24 hours.
That's where the hypertrophy was happening.
And you know, it clearly does account for all of that.
You know, your, your extra sort of myops and that second day is, is damage repair, you know, and
there's a whole load of studies that show why that might be the case.
So, you know, I think we've got to be really careful about what we can and can't do here.
And yes, I agree that if you do just go to the weekly net stimulus model and put in one set every
day, you will get a crazy number.
But I don't necessarily think that that is doable.
I think probably what you're looking at is more like 2 or 3 stimulating reps a day.
So the limitation obviously then is going to be what you can recover from, yes.
So it's going to be avoiding the accumulation post fatigue, but it's also, you know, going to be
avoiding that muscle damage repair process, chewing into your available myops and MPs in that second
day after the workout.
So we've got two issues going on here.
Both are caused by muscle damage, but one of them is that we're chewing into our available NPS or
Myops and the other is that we are basically starting to accumulate post drug fatigue and starting
to produce a interference with the stimulus that we are trying to generate.
Yes.
So then we need to work out well what is like how much muscle damage is recoverable in a day, in 24
hours.
Yeah.
So I mean, I think this is one of those situations where you know you, you're probably looking at 1
or 1 1/2 sets.
If you look at the tables and graphs that I've tried to create, you're probably looking at about 1
to 1 1/2 sets of moderate loads.
And you could do heavy loads and probably, you know, do more than I mean, we, we talked recently
about heavy load strength training and you can do silly numbers of singles if you really want to.
I guess that starts to go back to those circus performers and Eugene Sundown in those period of time
when they were doing lots and lots of single lifts, practicing lifts and doing a bunch of practice
lifts and then coming back for a day.
So, you know, maybe they were getting more than two or three stimulating reps in those situations
just by using heavy loads.
I think the problem that you you're gonna hit when you, you, you go into that territory is the same
problem that Olympic lift, Olympic weight lifters hit, which is that.
Yeah, if you've got the, if you've got the sort of genetics and the bio mechanics that allow you to
do that, you're going to be OK.
But a lot of people are going to run into difficulty that not from a muscular point of view, but
just because it creates overuse injuries.
And that I think is probably the, the problem with going down the route of saying, oh, well, you
know, I'll just do, you know, heavier loads and I'll do a bunch of stimulating reps and probably get
5 or even 10 stimulating reps a day for you heavy loads.
And, you know, kind of do it, do it that way.
I think probably the limitation there is separate.
The the nice thing about Hackenschmitt's routine is that you're probably not hitting that problem.
I think working with a 5 to 10 Rep zone with A10 Rep Max, I don't think you're going to be hitting
that kind of biomechanical problem.
So it's a really, really nice way of doing it.
So yeah, I mean, I think realistically Hackenschmidt probably is on the low side.
You know, you probably could get away with 1 to 1 1/2 sets, but you know, like we were saying at the
beginning, there isn't data of what happens when you start doing this stuff.
We don't have training studies where people have trained every day.
You don't really know what's gonna happen.
And I do think that a lot of the studies that measure post workout fatigue are pretty horribly
underpowered.
And you know, like I made the point with muscle swelling when I, you know, people say, oh, you know,
here's this.
And they, they, they love to do this.
They'll, they'll grab a whole bunch of studies that show no significant muscle swelling at like 24
hours or 48 hours after a, a workout.
And they'll, you know, kind of run around the Internet yelling about these studies going, you know,
it's not significant, therefore we can ignore it.
And I'm like, OK, if I put every single one of these studies on a chart and look at the numbers, you
know, if it's not significant because it's not there, it's not, it's not a thing.
What I should see is everything clustering around 0 because that's random.
Yeah.
So if it genuinely is nothing, I should see everything clustering around 0.
And I don't see everything clustering around zero.
I see everything clustering around like 4 or 5% muscle size increase.
You know, So I think there's this underpowering problem when we look at fatigue.
So even though, you know, we might have a.
A table or a chart that we've created that shows you can probably recover from one 1 1/2 sets, you
know, every day.
It's really interesting to see that Hagen Schmidt was way, way lower than that, you know, and he was
deliberately looking for ways to avoid that post work app T happening.
So I think the chances are that we probably do underestimate if anything, how much post work app T
is happening.
And so I would probably look to accurate and say I would start there.
I wouldn't start with the tables and the charts and go, hey, look, you know, this shows I can do 1
1/2 sets a day.
So I'm going to do, you know, maybe 2 sets with two reps in reserve and you know, do that every
single day.
I think you're probably going to have problems if you do that eventually.
Presumably within just a few weeks.
So you're following the progression hacking to be laid out, you're going to probably have fewer reps
in reserve at least in some of those sessions.
So there might be maybe some of those days with more providing more stimulating reps than others.
But a lot of people, a lot of people ask me, hey, can I just do one set of five, you know, zero to 1
reps in reserve.
So obviously what you said there is, look, you know, there's potentially a bit of a limitation here
in some of the data, but maybe that might be sort of, you know, hitting up against what might be
recoverable and someone could maybe child for themself.
Yeah.
I mean, I think I genuinely really like this model that Hagen Schmidt created and I think I really
would start there.
And as you say, like with the Hepburn routines, you do these for a couple of weeks, couple of
months, and you start to feel like you're pushing things a bit harder and you know, that's
inevitable.
So I think I think it's a really, really cool starting point.
I've never really been happy with the idea of doing a single set of, you know, moderate or moderate
heavy load today and training to failure and making that work.
I don't think that will really allow recovery to happen.
So I think basically we've got these two limitations.
You probably can do it with heavy loads, you know, not training to failure, just doing maybe a bunch
of double s and triples with fibroid maxes.
But honestly, if you do that, you are going to find that you get, unless you are very lucky and you
know, biomechanically perfect, I think you're probably going to experience some, some grumbles along
the way.
Go down the route of doing moderate loads.
You're probably going to find that your first workout fatigue accumulate.
So I think either way you're going to hit a problem and doing it this way where you're just doing
say two or three stimulating reps a day with moderate loads is a really, really nice solution.
Really impressed actually.
I have experimented with some of those methods.
You know, we talked about this a few years ago and I've tried doing singles and double s with about
a four or five Rep Max and I can get away with it for I did a couple of months, but eventually it
caught up with me and maybe different exercises or different muscles might be different, but I tried
to know a few different things and it did.
Yeah, it did beat me up a bit.
Yeah.
And I think really that's that's kind of why I would just sort of draw a circle around it and say,
you know, what we're really interested in is a sustainable practice that can be done, you know, and
that's why this is probably about as close to a sustainable practice as I've ever seen.
And just reiterating, we are literally working off, you know, a historical, you know, account here.
We're not working off data that we've that, you know, that exists in the scientific literature.
It's just interesting to note how much of the Physiology is clearly apparent in a routine like this
where you know, you're getting a couple of stimulating reps, It's going to produce a bump in the NPS
or Myops and it's going to probably come down pretty much to baseline within sort of 24 to 36 hours.
And you're going to get, you know, a very nice bump the following day when you train again.
And you're never really going to accumulate post workout tea because you're missing those last
couple of reps of the set.
It's, it's really, really nice the way that he's done this.
It's very, very impressive.
So ultimately I think that would be my starting point.
I really would.
So the two questions I've got for you then would be A, is there anything else to consider if someone
was planning on giving something like this a go?
And then B, are there any specific advantages?
Because you've kind of talked about, well, if you're doing multi sets and you're doing it every
second day, obviously you're going to get a higher spike of my OPS and the the hypertrophy potential
of that is going to be higher than a single set or even a couple of simulating reps.
So is there actually a specific benefit to doing it this way, or would it just be someone preferred
it or wanted to experiment with it?
I think experimentation is probably the main reason why you would do something like this.
I mean like you were talking about, you know, recently the the sort of thing that I would probably
put as the first suggestion for making this kind of thing work would be to rotate exercises.
Do not do the same exact exercise every day.
So, you know, by all means play around with training a muscle every day.
But I think you could probably have.
I mean, this is interesting because you know, we've talked before about how you know, you really
can't do ABC routines in a full body situation.
You can't do ABC routines in an upper lower situation.
You can't even do AB in an up and lower situation if you're doing them classically AS4 workouts a
week.
You can if you're doing 6, but that's not really up and lower, that's full body split out into upper
and lower components.
So, but you could here, you could do ABC, you could do ABC.
And so you had a day off.
Yeah, absolutely.
I mean that's, that's an interesting idea.
So you can actually gather together your, you know, three favorite full body workouts and you could
just do those, you know, as you say, 6 days a week and whatever and that would actually work from a
muscle fiber perspective.
That's interesting.
I mean, one thing I didn't mention about Hackenschmidt is he does talk where these sessions are
quite short.
I forget exactly how long, but I think he specified some in the rounds of 20 to 30 minutes.
So in this scenario, I guess it it would be that if you're picking one exercise per muscle, one set,
yeah, it would be a fairly short workout you're doing.
You're basically doing your 23 minute 30 minute workout six days a week instead of your hour session
every other day.
Yeah, and I doubt you would need enormous amounts of warm up for most of the lifts.
You know, I mean, it would really only be if you were sort of trying to make this work with, you
know, kind of sort of complex multi joint exercises that required a lot to warm up.
But even then, because you're working with A10 Rep Max and you're doing probably 567 reps with it,
you probably don't need to be quite so, you know, sort of dedicated to the warm up as you would be
if you were trying to do, you know, a lot heavier loads or you were trying to train to failure or
anything like that.
So, you know, I think really it, it's a very interesting, it's a very interesting approach.
I still, I still think my default would always be, you know, full body three times a week or every
other day.
I think that is, is probably the the easiest and most elegant way of solving the problem.
But as you say, for people who really want to train every day, people who want to experiment, people
who want to see what happens, I think, yeah, doing sort of ABC, ABC across 6 days with, you know,
sort of training the same muscles but with different exercises, you know, using Hackenschmidt's
protocol, progressive overload.
I think that could be a really interesting experiment.
I think it'd be really interesting to play around with.
I don't think it will come out better than training 3 or 3 1/2 * a week, but for some people it
might just work scheduling reasons.
Or maybe they've got a home gym and they just run in there for 25 minutes and run out again.
I don't know.
I mean.
That's what I'm thinking too.
If you have some equipment at home or even if you're a PT and you only get half an hour between a
client to do a session, you know, on the gym floor 5 or 6 days a week, you know, there might be some
scenarios where this just works.
It's just more convenient.
And realistically, 90% of people, this is going to be a less convenient option, but there'll be some
people out there where it might just work really well.
Yeah, absolutely.
I mean, yeah, again, very limited data, really just building stuff up from history and Physiology.
Not trying to tell people this is the next big thing at all.
Far from it.
You know, just kind of talking around a concept and, and seeing, you know, what, what might work,
what could what could work and, and why, you know, and hopefully just dispelling this myth that, you
know, we need to get Myops back down to baseline before you train again.
You don't need to get it all the way right down to baseline.
You just need to accept that anything above baseline is, is, you know, lost benefit.
Really.
So, yeah, sure, if you were still at 100% above baseline from the previous day, you know, I was in
100% of your peak, then, you know, you would not be getting any benefit when that's not happening.
That's absolutely not happening.
You know, it does come down a long way from the previous day and so there is a cost, but it's not a
an overwhelming cost.
Anything else we should mention for people to consider?
I guess one thing would be the type of exercises you're selecting and you've mentioned anyway.
Obviously if you're.
Using the compound.
Lifts, that's going to be a limitation, so you'd probably be thinking more single joint exercises,
maybe more contracted position exercises, machines if you had access to them.
Yeah.
I mean, obviously if you're doing your ABC, you could sort of focus a bit more on your contract
position stuff and you could just throw in your critical stretch position once every three days,
like, you know, to keep your sarcomereogenesis.
I do think that, you know, squats, bench dead squats, bench presses and deadlifts are probably going
to be the most complicated and difficult ones.
Deadlift actually might not be horrible or a deadlift variation might not be horrible like a rack
pool maybe, but or an RDL, but certainly a kind of classic power lift is probably going to be really
difficult to warm up for and you're just not going to feel like it makes any sense.
So that would probably be the biggest downside.
But yeah, I mean, you could go down the contractor position route.
That would certainly give a big benefit in terms of avoiding post workout fatigue.
But that's always the case.
And it's just that not every muscle would let you do that, you know, so that's a challenge.
But yeah, so I think practically it's all the same stuff we've talked about in other situations.
You know, managing post workout fatigue is always going to be an issue in anybody's program, even
whether they're training every other day or every day.
Cool.
So if there's someone out there listening, he's going to jump in and get this a go.
We'd love to hear feedback.
Is there anything else you want to mention before we start off?
No, hopefully that was short and sweet and interesting for people.
As I say, absolutely not saying that this is the next big thing or anything like that.
I'm just hoping to clarify how the Physiology works and mesh it with the history, which is really
the purpose of this podcast in every podcast that we do.
Yeah, and it's a question that's coming up.
A lot of the moment people are interested in doing this.
And like I said, we're not pushing you to do it.
But if you guys want to give it a go, A, give it a go, see how you respond.
And B, we wanted to talk and provide a little bit of Physiology and a little bit of stuff there to
think about that might help you if you do plan on giving it a go.
So let us know, give us some feedback, and we'd love to hear how it goes.
And until next time, thank you for joining us, and hopefully you'll join us next week for another
episode.