Episode: 005 Training volume and post workout fatigue - how many sets are recoverable in 48 hours?
URL: https://open.spotify.com/episode/6FFqZnRAcbnCnGLxfpLaWf
Published: 2025-06-22
================================================================================

Welcome back everyone to another episode of Hypertrophy past and present.
And actually, you know what, Chris, I haven't told you this.
I was when I uploaded our last episode, I looked at where viewers or listeners were located.
And you guys who are listening are located in over 100 different countries.
So yeah, So whoever you're listening, welcome and thank you for joining us.
So as always, I'll be introducing us to another old school plan in a moment during the past part of
the podcast.
And then Chris, you'll be introducing us to a new topic later today on the present part of the
podcast.
Is there anything you want to jump in and and lead with today?
No, I'm good.
I'm looking forward to hearing about this, this strength training program from the past.
Is it, is it Reg Park that we've got today?
It is Dredge Park.
So last week we spoke about Steve Reeves and today we've got Dredge Park.
So we've got two of the great Mr. Universes back-to-back.
And last week I said that the the Steve Reeves plan we were talking about was my personal favorite
silver era plan and I made a comment that there was one other that I really liked and this is one of
those so Reg Park, obviously.
Oh, well, I say obviously, but maybe you don't know he, he published quite a lot of different plans
and people will know Reg most of his 5 by 5.
And we're going to talk about a variant of that in a moment.
But contrary to how the Steve Reeves plan looked last week, Reg used less exercise variation and he
used multiple sets per exercise.
So I personally love that combination of, of combining kind of what Steve did with what Reg did.
But let me introduce you guys to this particular Reg plan and then we can talk about it.
So this one, like I said, he had a lot of different plans and this was what he called the Miss
Universe, a bulk course.
Now, bulk is a word like we kind of colloquially use it a little bit today.
And you talk about bulking and, and that's sort of associated more with kind of like a dirty bulk
and just weight gaining.
And they used it a little bit like that, but there seemed to be a slightly different nuance to the
way that they were using it back then.
It was very, very common, very commonly when they talk about their bulking routines and their
bulking routines tended to be more like their their weight gain.
It was kind of like you had someone who needed to gain muscle mass and you would do a bulk routine
and then after you've gained A considerable amount of muscle mass, then you might look at a
definition or that would call it defining.
I think workouts where you know, you might sort of isolate muscles or whatever to get into like show
can not just conditioning, but to I guess, maximally develop particular muscles.
So this bulk course is a little bit more of a guess what we would call a mass gaining course or
program.
So I'll just read through it and then I'll, I'll make it cup.
Actually, I'll, I'll tell you guys first kind of the instructions for it and then I'll read through
the exercises.
So he made it very clear.
And actually I want to make a point about this as well.
When you look at a lot of these plans, I don't know if you've noticed this so far, Chris, but a lot
of the time there's a little bit of like almost vagueness in the way that they, they give
instructions.
So they talk about reps so they talk about sets and it's kind of like sort of do something like
this.
And they, they kind of give people a few options.
And Reg sort of did this as well.
So he would say never train more than three times a week.
And it's like, well, does that mean always train three times a week?
Or does it mean maybe you can do 2 as well?
Like it's, it's a little bit vague, but he goes never do more than three times a week.
OK.
And then he kind of talked of ramping up volume.
So he would say perform soon in the 1st first week.
I, I think he actually said start with one set and the next week go to two sets.
But it was sort of a, a gradual increase over the first couple weeks.
And then he said for one month you can do three sets per exercise.
For the next month you're going to do 4 sets and then for the next month you're going to do 5 sets.
So that sounds a lot.
We're not talking warm up sets here, we're talking actual work sets.
So worked up to five sets per exercise.
And again, he made this very clear.
He said you're never going to do more than five sets, do not do more than five and do not do five
sets for more than a month.
He said.
Now one other sort of somewhat vague instruction that he gave is at with the repetitions.
He said never do more than X.
And I'll tell you what that number is for each exercise, but it was a little bit like, you know, do
do you do a couple less?
You do a double progression method.
I assume he was suggesting you do a double progression method.
So the first exercise was a barbell squat.
So again, you would do three sets for the first month, 4 for the 2nd, 5 for the third.
And you do your, your sets.
And he would say never do above 5 repetitions.
And the instruction was once you can do all of those sets with the five repetitions, then you go
heavier.
Now to me, that's suggesting when you go heavier, you're probably gonna drop the the repetitions and
you're probably gonna drop down them through repetitions or so.
So I'm assuming that that's what the indication was there, but it was very much don't go above 5.
So we've got the bar bar squat.
Now this was superseted with the breathing pullover and I believe we've talked about the pullover.
We've touched on it briefly in the past.
We might touch on it again in a moment.
And then that was for a set of 10.
Now typically with that you wouldn't go overly heavy.
It was, it was not really like a go to failure type exercise and you'd do that immediately after the
squat.
Then he moved into wide grip bench press and it was very specific.
It had to be wide grip.
And again, this was never more than 5 repetitions.
And in fact, elsewhere he actually talks about doing this for as as few as 2 repetitions.
And then you go to what he, I believe he calls it a power deadlift, which is basically like a rack
pull.
So a knee high rack pull.
And at the top of the the lift, you do a shrug with it.
And again, this was sets of five and then we're going above 5.
And then he after that would do a barbell vertical shrug.
Now with this, he would recommend doing as many reps as possible with your Max deadlift weight.
Now here he actually said never go above 20.
I don't I've never tried doing vertical shrugs on my Max.
They lift weights so I don't have a ballpark for how many one is likely to do.
But he did say don't go above 20 with that one.
And then we've got a wide grip bent over barbell row, again, never going above 5.
And finally, we have an exercise which I've actually been using a little bit more than my my
training groups, which is a barbell cheating curl.
And it's quite an interesting exercise.
If you guys haven't done it is basically just a, a looser tech, a looser form barbell curl like a
exactly what it sounds like you use a little bit of hip involvement in it.
And he was doing this very heavy.
He was also doing this for no more than 5 repetitions, so very heavy loads.
What do you make of all of that?
So there's quite a few things that we can say here.
I mean, it's really interesting to look at this program in comparison with the Steve Reeves program
that we looked at previously, because we're kind of going from one extreme to the other.
You know, we had a program that had an enormous amount of exercise variety in with pretty much, you
know, full coverage for every muscle, muscle region that you can think of with a one or two minor
exceptions.
And then we look at this and we're like, wow, this is this is so different.
This is much more minimalist.
And I can see some really big holes in this routine.
You know, there's there's there's a lot not here.
I mean, straight away, you know, we're very limited on the amount of work.
I mean, I know I kind of make this point all the time, but you know, I'm just seeing here that we've
got a row, which is wide grip.
Well, OK, so where's the lat work then?
So no narrow grip, no surgical plane pulling, and I've got no frontal plane pulling.
So there's not even a pull up in here.
You know, you could radically improve this program just by putting a pull up in it.
That's that.
And this is the point I've made multiple times when we've been looking at these routines, like pull
ups are not difficult to set up.
You know, this is not an equipment issue really.
So it seems to be a huge kind of failing in, in my opinion of many of these older routines that I
just don't think in terms of that frontal plane pulling which would.
Some have realized the frontal plane pull up or pull down, so I'll bring one for you soon just just
to alleviate some of this anxiety over the lack of Latin.
Anxiety just noticing A trend, you know, but here there's no lat training at all really, unless you
put the pullover into the lat category.
And it's a very kind of limited lat exercise.
But yeah, so essentially we've got the pullover is really the only thing that gets close to touching
the lat and and obviously that the back work is very transverse plane focused.
Also, this is a big shift away from the very early programs.
I think we started out, did we start out with Sundown?
We did, didn't we?
We start out with a Milo barbell A.
Milo Barbell Company.
Which was kind of like the bridge between Sandown and Yep.
But we were modeling on kind of the Sundown heritage.
So that focus on overhead pressing was was really big when we first looked to the early routines.
And now it's gone, you know, so like we've got kind of two shrug exercises in here, you know, but
we've got, but we've got literally no red pressing at all.
So again, if really interesting to see these changes in the focus because of the exercise of the
day.
So I think that the lack of the lack of sort of lat work like a frontal or sagittal plane pulling, I
mean, you can argue that the pullover does that, but it's so far outside the range of motion where
the lats are, you know, got leverage, it doesn't really count in my opinion.
And then the the lack of overhead pressing again, I think is a really interesting omission.
But again, like I mentioned in some of the early routines, there was a lack of deadlift variation
when you could again say, look, you know, it's not difficult if you got a barbell, you can pick it
up off the ground.
So why haven't we got deadlift variations making a bigger impact in those early programs and we just
didn't see that.
And now we see it, you know, and the rec pools are really interesting kind of choice to sort of
shift focus and work on different muscle groups.
So again, very, very interesting just to see the sort of diverse choices that are going on here in
terms of exercise selection.
So I think that would probably be my sort of immediate observations.
I mean, those are observations obviously ignoring the stuff that I will say every time, which is
obviously we haven't got the equipment.
So we can't do, you know, Rectus Morris training with knee extensions.
We can't do hamstrings training with leg curls because those kind of things didn't necessarily
exist.
So you can't really argue that that's a a failing because there's just no, no real meaningful way to
do that obviously.
But yeah, those will be my initial impressions just on the excise selection side of things.
What do you make of the the pullover?
I know you briefly touched on it potentially being a little bit of Latin, but you know, obviously
not the most ideal exercise.
A lot of these guys did include this as part of their squat routine.
They'll do the squat with a pullover and they did talk about a more from a a rib cage chest
perspective.
Do you have any thoughts on that or do you think this is just something weird that kind of got
grandfathered in and people followed it?
Well, essentially that if you're doing a pullover where in the way that they would have done, I
imagine, which is where you're using a standard weight like a bottle or an easy bar and basically
your peak external moment on is in the most extended position, the most stretched position of the
movement.
OK.
Now if you're doing it that way, it's basically going to be a coastal PEC exercise with, you know,
some posterior adult there, you know, to help you.
So I think that is it's valid to categorize it in that way.
I don't think I would categorize it as an, as a lat exercise first and foremost.
I think I'll probably categorize it.
I've I've talked around this issue many, many times before, but it is kind of a mixed bag.
You've got lots of stuff going on.
But I think arguably the coastal PEC is probably the the kind of the, the key factor there.
So I would agree with them.
I would say, you know, yeah, if you're treating that as a chest exercise, that's not wrong.
Absolutely.
Obviously it's not going to be going anywhere close to the upper parts of the PEC because those are
shoulder flexors rather than shoulder extensors.
Well, it's interesting because they talk about it very much as like an expansion exercise.
You know, the, the goal here is to make the chest large and not, I don't just mean, you know,
obviously the bench was the main mass build up, but it was that very iconic.
Like if you guys look up photos of Dredge Park, like you'll see just how well developed and, and
large his chest was.
And they're talking about it from that perspective of literally like it's expanding the rib cage,
it's expanding the chest.
And it's interesting.
You're saying, you know, it's more kind of lower chest, which I guess is somewhat neglected a lot of
the time time potentially it would have that aesthetic kind of impact.
Yeah.
And it's again, like you say, aesthetic choices probably play into this.
So like we talked at the beginning of this series of podcasts that we did about the aesthetic
choices of people from the Sundial kind of heritage where they were thinking mainly about the
overhead pressing, producing that sort of deltoid development and not really wanting chess
development at all.
And and you can see that.
I mean, just look at the photos of those guys.
You know, you can see that.
And as you say, you know, you look perhaps the photos of this group of bodybuilders and you can see
that the chest development is very much marked by comparison.
Is that the pullover doing that?
Is that the bench press doing that?
I mean, obviously the bench press again, was something that we tended to not see in those early
training programs.
So there's there's there's there's different things going on.
But yeah, I mean, obviously it's designed to be a minimalist program.
So I don't want to just kind of stand here and poke holes in it and go, they don't have this
exercise and they don't have that exercise.
Well, yeah, of course they don't because it's designed to be a minimalist program.
But for me, there's just a couple of things that I really don't understand why they didn't have them
in there.
Yeah.
And they do often talk about these bulking type routines essentially being minimalist.
They call them like a abbreviated type plans where they are intentionally reducing the amount of
exercises for the sake of just gaining as much mass as possible.
And then they are these exercises back in, which is probably why they talk about not doing this for
more than, you know, 12 weeks or however long.
I will show you a grudge park work out in a future episode, which is hopefully a little bit more to
your liking as far as exercise selection goes.
But what I found particularly interesting about this one was these are pretty high volume per
exercise.
So he's going up to five sets per exercise and suggesting that you can do this Monday, Wednesday,
Friday, your typical kind of 48 hour sort of part per workout.
Now for you guys who've who've, you know, listened to our content, you probably know that generally
speaking, we would say that probably that three sets per 48 hours is kind of the sweet spot for
recovery.
So how is it that in the silver era where, you know, before steroids, people were presumably doing
4-5 sets and, you know, seem to be getting good results?
Yeah.
So I think we've got 2 observations to make on that point.
Firstly is the one where you, you described in your kind of introductory instructions that he
provides.
So he's saying you don't do you know, the five sets for more than one month.
So he's already kind of he's, he's kind of accepting or taking into account, you know, acknowledging
is kind of what I'm going for.
He's acknowledging that you can't just run this indefinitely, which is kind of indicating that
they're, they know that some post workout fatigue is going to accumulate.
So I think we can kind of straight away just point out that there's this recognition that this is
not a sustainable state.
So I think that's a really good observation from them to say that, you know, you start pushing
higher than, you know, 3 or 4 sets per muscle group per workout three times a week and you're going
to run into this fatigue accumulation problem.
The second thing is of course that we're dealing here with heavy loads more or less.
So it's kind of working with, you know, sort of 345 repetitions per set and as you said, even going
down as low as 2 in certain cases like the bench press.
Now that's really interesting.
So the is in terms of post workout recovery is really, really good for the classic strength training
range of about 6 to 10 reps per set.
So if you want to draw a graph, and I've done my own version of this, but you can collect all of the
data in either untrained or trained people.
I've done a chart in strength trained people of all the studies I could find where they measured
post workout recovery after doing sets to failure or close to failure with six to 10 repetitions per
set.
And essentially you can graph the amount of volume that you can do and recover in a certain period
of time.
And that's where we get this kind of, you know, three sets as recovery or within 48 hours, five sets
is recovered within 72 hours and so on and so on.
So that's, there's a huge amount of data available for that.
And it's really well established.
You can kind of do the analysis yourself.
If you try and do the same analysis with heavy loads, the wheels come off.
You just can't do it because what you find, and I did this as a table, I couldn't do as a chart
because there's just not, there's not enough granularity in the data to do it.
Because what you find is that basically pretty much any number of sets of singles, double S,
triples, or even up to, you know, kind of getting close to five repetitions per set.
Anything you do in that is recoverable within sort of you just, you can't really do you know, enough
sets to really see a significant, that kind of effect of fatigue at the Fortier Tower point.
You can see it to 24 hours and higher numbers of sets, but you don't really see it at the Fortier
Tower market.
Not always, not, not, not not very often anyway.
And and that's really, really interesting.
So basically what we're seeing is this massive difference between the post workout fatigue created
by moderate loads and post workout fatigue created by heavy loads and heavy, I mean, up to sort of
fibre repetitions per set.
Now just to kind of finalise this observation that I'm kind of presenting here, if we now look at
lighter loads, so off the top end of the sort of 15 Rep Max is that you kind of say is the top end
of the moderate load Rep range between 6 and 15.
If you go off the top end of that and you start doing sets with lighter loads, you're going to find
that a single set of light loads to failure is going to give you 4872 hours worth of fatigue.
It's absolutely nuts.
So there's this perception, I think in the fitness industry as a whole, obviously we're kind of, if
you think about Vincent is a gigantic kind of pyramid where kind of this tiny, little, tiny little
triangle at the top that talks about the scientific bits.
And the majority of the Vincent is just people who want to be motivated to exercise.
And of course that's the majority of this pyramid.
But if you look at this majority of the pyramid, most people would just kind of go, well, heavy
loads take longer to recover because because, but the reality is, is the opposite.
So what we see is an incredibly strong trend for being able to do quite high numbers of sets of
singles, double S, triples and not actually see any post workout fatigue at say 2448 hours.
And you start increasing the Rep ranges, you immediately start seeing that post workout fatigue and
you get as high as lighter loads.
And absolutely, you know, the wheels come off.
You can't actually do light loads training to failure with single, even with single sets three times
a week.
You just fatigue is going to be there every time you come back and that's going to then create
accumulated fatigue problems.
So we're seeing this very strong like observable trend for Rep range to have an enormous impact on
post workout fatigue.
This is really significant.
And so I, I do actually want to go over some of it again because it will be new to a lot of people I
think who are listening to this.
So you've made that, that obvious statement there that, you know, a lot of people do believe that
actually this post workout fatigue is, is worse or higher with heavier loads and lower repetitions.
And you know, that was a, a mantra that I heard all the time as an early PT, you know, heavy loads
called CNS fatigue.
Like that was just what people said and no one really questioned that.
And ultimately what you said there is there's there's very, very high ceiling, if if anything, to
how many sets you can do of, of very heavy loads if you're doing singles.
I mean, what there's in the table that you put out there, there was a study where they used, what,
20 sets of singles?
Yeah.
So just to be clear for people who are struggling to understand that table, when researchers test
things like that, you don't obviously expect your subjects to lift their one Rep Max 20 times.
I mean, I don't think I've lifted A1 Rep Max 20 times in my life.
So nobody's going to do that.
You know, in a single workout.
What happens is they do a sort of their initial estimated one Rep Max and then the researchers will
reduce the weight slightly based on the rest period that they're going to have and what they think
the likely one Rep Max will be in the next attempt.
The kind of.
Drop the weight by, you know, sort of 5% or so and then you do it again and then you drop the weight
by a bit more and you do it again.
So you end up with these 20 singles.
No, they're not 21 at Max's, but at the point when the attempt was made, it's kind of pretty much
the maximum weight that they could lift.
Now, even with that scenario going on, as you say, you don't really get any post workout tea.
And this is a really perfect moment for me to just like add in a quick observation on what fatigue
actually is.
And I'm not going to run for, you know, kind of 1020 minutes here.
I just want to make a very quick observation, which is that when we say fatigue in exercise science,
what we mean is that there is a temporary period of time in which exercise performance is reduced.
And you can see that in the workout itself, like what I've just described.
So they do the 20 singles and exercise performance drops and you have to reduce the weight in order
to be able to do your next single.
OK, So we're seeing fatigue happening during the workout.
Fatigue is the temporary reduction in exercise performance.
It is a measurable outcome.
It's not anything physiologically kind of defined as in we can't say what mechanisms are unless we
kind of drill into that and start investigating, but it is the outcome.
It is the measurable reduction in strength.
If I come back the following day and I measure again my strength and it's reduced slightly, then I
can say that there is fatigue present.
Now if I come back the following day, and this is the point I want to make, this is the point I want
to make.
If I come back the following day after that workout, after that 20 singles, which honestly I would
be very unhappy about doing.
If I did that 20 singles and came back the following day and discovered that actually, like many of
the subjects in this study, there was no reduction in strength at 24 hours, then I am not fatigued.
I'm going to say that again.
If I've done that 20 singles and I come back the following day and I'm I'm still capable of
producing the same amount of force I was the previous day.
I'm not fatigued now.
I might feel miserable, might feel, I might ache.
I might be in extreme discomfort.
I might dread the thought of going near a barbell again.
I might feel all kinds of emotions and feelings associated with the workout that I did the previous
day, including up to hating the people who maybe do it.
But I'm not fatigued.
And this is the thing that I really want to emphasize that when exercise scientists use the word
fatigue, they're referring to an objective reduction in exercise performance.
They're not referring to how you feel.
Yes, when we start drilling into mechanisms and we talk about, you know, central nervous system
fatigue at the Super spinal level, yes, that's absolutely related to you know, feelings and emotions
and those kind of things and that can create a reduction in strength.
But if it doesn't, then technically fatigue is not present.
And I think this really is one of those things.
Again, I, I say this all the time and there's so many of these things I could just do.
But if I literally just said that for the rest of my time in the fitness industry, I wouldn't be a
waste of time.
Because everybody in the fitness industry thinks fatigue is a feeling.
It's a, an emotion, It's a, it's a sensation.
It's this kind of like state that kind of creates problems and nobody really knows what it is.
And that's why we've got these ridiculous things being said by, you know, some people in the fitness
industry, in our section of the fitness industry, the bit that talks about the science and things
like that, you've got people saying, well, you know, you know, fatigue doesn't affect your ability
to stimulate adaptations.
I'm like, sorry, what?
You know, if you have a reduction in exercise performance and that's caused by a reduction in
recruitment or mechanical tension, then it has to affect your ability to stimulate adaptations
because those are the two things that stimulate the adaption, or at least in hypertrophy terms.
So again, there's just massive confusion about what actually is.
And so really I just wanted to emphasize that how fatigue is the objective reduction in performance.
So yes, if we have a workout comprising 20 singles starting with one Rep Max and decreasing
downwards as as required to complete their workout and you come back the following day and there's
no reduction in strength present as a result of that previous day's workout, no, we are not
fatigued.
The subject is not fatigued.
And that's the really interesting thing that we're we're addressing here.
Yeah, there's lots of really good things then.
And I think you've touched on probably why this myth has been perpetuated as to what fatigue uses
because people are just simply associated with the feeling.
And like said, you could do those 20 singles, you come back feeling like, you know, absolutely
awful, not wanting to touch a barbell, but you may not be fatigued.
And so you could do these 20 singles not be fatigued by the following day or certainly by two days,
but in that study the following day.
And then you, and we're not even talking, you know, 20 singles of a barbell girl.
I mean, we're talking like compound lift squats.
And yet you could do a single set of 2025 repetitions in a leg extension and still be fatigued days
later.
Absolutely.
And that's that's the issue because that then requires us to say, well, what's happening then why is
this happening in this particular way?
And so that requires us to then say what, what's the, what is the underlying physiological state
that we need to investigate to understand post workout fatigue and ultimately what it comes back to.
And I posted about this very recently, I did a a slide deck where I showed people that post workout
fatigue is not actually primarily happening during the workout, is actually a process that we
undergo in the post workout period.
In case people have missed it, could you just quickly cover again?
See, we've said sort of singles, you could do 1520 sets and be recovered.
And then you said in that graph that you've put together 6 to 10 repetitions.
And then you said that these high repetitions, you know, 1520 plus they're obviously more fatiguing
still is there, can you just quickly cover that sort of continuum?
You know, where do we see the significant steps up in post workout fatigue?
Sure.
So this is, this is really, really interesting and this is something that is becoming more obvious.
The more time I think we spend looking at this data, you know, the more we look at these groups of
studies and go, OK, what's what's happening here?
So basically we can start with those 3 categories, the one to five, 6 to 15 and then 16 plus.
And exactly as you just summarized, we've got very little post work out T happening in the heavy
group, moderate amount happening in the moderate group and then just silly amounts in the light load
group.
Also, if we drill down within those categories, especially when we're looking at the heavy end of
the spectrum, we can do the same thing again.
So like the example of the 20 singles, there's just no fatigue happening at all in the post workout
period.
But when you start to get up to even 810 sets of, you know, sort of the, the kind of the 345
repetitions per set, then suddenly it starts to display fatigue at 24 and even 36.
And then if you push it up to this, I think there's one of the studies I've got on my list is sort
of brushing the six Rep mark, 6 Rep Max mark.
Then you start to see 48 hours as well maybe.
And in certain cases, interestingly that I don't know, I think that six Rep actually was only 36
hours.
But the interesting thing about that six Rep Max study is that they did have a a much more granular
measurement of post workout fatigue.
So they took multiple measurements over the period they were measuring, not just 2448 whatever.
And that showed a secondary muscle damage effect.
So we'll get into that in a minute when we talk about what post work actually looks like.
But when you see something like a secondary post workout and fatigue effect where you get that
initial strength loss as a result of the workout and then you come back for 8/10/12 hours later and
it's dropped again, secondary reduction in strength, that tells you you've got an inflammatory
process going on, which is part of the key kind of post work effect.
So in answer to your question, what we see not only is differences between heavy, moderate and light
loads, but we also see differences within those Rep ranges.
So is a sliding scale all the way through.
Yeah.
And I think this is really interesting thing, which is that if you're working with singles, double
S, triples, which is kind of how Olympic weightlifting is constructed, if you're working in those
Rep ranges, then they can literally just train every day and bash out a whole bunch of singles and
double s and come back the following day and do it again.
And that's why it works because ultimately those kind of repetition ranges just don't really 'cause
much post worker fatigue.
And if you're managing that kind of other side of the problem, which is, you know, hating the
barbell and not wanting to do that and it hurting.
And if you've got the resilience to those issues, you know, for whatever reason, maybe you're just
constructed in a way that biomechanically means that you can squat perfectly with absolutely no, you
know, kind of discomforting sensations or problems or any other soft tissue issues, then fine.
I mean, you can basically do that forever.
Not forever, forever, but you get the idea.
As soon as you start to push a bit towards that top end of that racket and you're doing fours and
fives and sixes, well, that's then a very different category.
So I think we do see a difference in the one to three from the, the, the sort of the the 4:00 to
6:00.
I want to make one observation based off that.
So in the program we just talked about 300 Park 1, he actually wrote AI guess like a secondary
program for people who wanted to do weightlifting inside bodybuilding.
And it was very much the same kind of thing.
But he made a few exercise substitutions and he added in several additional exercises.
So there's actually more volume per muscle, but they were doing triples instead of fires.
And that's interesting what you've just said there, that if you drop down to triples, there's a much
higher ceiling.
And that actually followed exactly what we saw in that program.
Exactly.
And you know, I think, I mean, we obviously probably would consider Doug Hepburn's programs to be a
little bit outside of our focus on this podcast.
But you look back at those and you sort of doing 8 sets of two and three that I think really is one
of those sweet spots where you get an enormous amount of work done, tremendous strength gains, very
effective hypertrophy.
I personally ran that program for about two years.
I absolutely loved it.
I never, I only really kind of struggled with because I was probably at the older end of the
spectrum of the kind of people who'd be doing that program, but I only really found it was just
occasionally I would get a discomfort and maybe hip pain doing squats or something like that.
Never really have any issues with fatigue, always making progress.
So personally, I really kind of found those programs to be very, very effective for what they were
trying to do.
So yeah, I think again, what we've got is not just differences between these categories of Rep
ranges, but also within the category.
And it's actually quite a steep curve, like we've just been saying.
The curve going from the singles, double S, triples up to the four fives and sixes is a very, very
big shift.
So singles, double S, triples, 8 plus sets, fours and fives in a 48 hour recovery period, Fours and
fives, What four or five sets they're about?
I think that's probably right and that would fit perfectly with what Ridge Park was doing.
You think?
I think probably that's that's true.
I think A5 sets of five is probably toppy.
And again, but we have to stop and just remember that that's not five sets of five all the time.
That's five sets of probably a bunch of threes, some fours and A5 here and there.
You know, and so maybe start out and you do, you get 5 on your first set, but maybe you do 4 and
then three and then three, what have you.
It's not actually spending the whole time doing fives.
You've got maybe just one or two weeks here and there where you've got fives.
And then sixes sevens 8I.
Think we're pushing into the moderate load spectrum there.
I think you're starting to get to the zone where realistically where I would be always trying to
keep a three sets as my as my target.
I don't I think ultimately we have to remember that, you know, across and this is something we were
talking about before we started this podcast actually on a completely separate topic, which I won't
I won't raise here because it's an entirely different kind of problem.
When we use statistical significance to identify the presence of a particular phenomenon, we've got
to bear in mind that we're using that in the context of our measurement accuracy levels.
So we're only going to find stuff if it's really, really obvious.
So I think when we're talking about post workout fatigue, we have to remember that when we're using
statistical significance to identify the presence of something, that's when it's really screamingly
obviously there that that kind of tells you if you just kind of extrapolate logically without
getting emotionally attached to how statistical significance works.
If you just extrapolate logically, that implies that we're probably missing a present supposed to
work out fatigue in a lot of other situations.
So I'm not trying to kind of, you know, a lot of people say that I overestimate how important
fatigue is.
I absolutely don't, but I'm just kind of pointing out here that there will be scenarios where we can
say what statistically there's no fatigue there.
I bet there is though.
I bet there is some.
I bet there's a tail end of some there.
So realistically, yes, you know, if you're doing three sets of say 567, you're probably going to
find that there's a lot less likelihood of post work appetite being present in comparison with
somebody who's doing the top end of that range. 8-9 and ten higher than that twelves whatever.
Absolutely.
But I would still probably say that my limit is probably three sets.
Realistic kind of possible limit is probably three sets for that zone.
So yeah, I think you could probably go to five sets when you're going below 5 all the time.
I think if you're going above 5, like I tend to train above 5 a lot because it's just convenient to
do so.
But you know, I think if you're doing that, I think I would still sit with the three sets in the
same way that because it technically is a moderate load at that point, so.
And when you think you would have to drop down to two sets.
So the chances are, I've never thought about that question.
The chances are that if you're training all the time in the Rep range between 10 and 15 and you're
pushing the higher end of that spectrum, then I would imagine that you're probably going to need to
ameliorate your three set standard that I would say is a moderate low standard.
If you're always training that 10 to 15 Rep Max range, I would say probably want to be on 2 instead
of three sets.
I just don't understand why you would train in that in that Rep range when you can probably just as
easily train in the 6:10.
Maybe there are certain practical situations where people just lower.
Well, I'm so strong and this exercise is the only one I've got.
OK, fine, OK, well, you know, I understand that, but.
I think practicality is is a good argument there.
Exactly.
I do use such prep range for some exercises and it's almost.
Always exactly, you know, you're like 8 feet tall.
So I mean, so that, I mean that's the advantage of being a small guy.
So I think, yeah, in 10 to 15, I would say if they're in that range, then I'd probably drop from
three times to above 15.
Obviously, it's just not going to work.
You're not going to be able to train three times a week with any number of sets per workout if
you're in the above 15.
I think that was really interesting.
Hopefully people have enjoyed that.
I derailed you.
You wanted to talk about fatigue mechanisms, so I'll let you go now.
Sure.
So people are going to be really sick of me talking by the end of this podcast.
So basically I just wanted to take 510 minutes to walk through exactly what is happening in the post
workout period and why these Rep ranges produce the effects that they do.
So essentially very quickly as a preamble, there is a kind of, again in the fitness industry as a
whole, there's a perception that post workout fatigue is produced by muscle damage and muscle damage
is caused by muscle fibers tearing themselves apart during exercise.
Neither of those two statements are really true.
So basically post workout fatigue is a collection of four or five separate mechanisms and they all
traced back to biochemical processes that occurred during a workout in relation to calcium ion
accumulation.
So the reason we talk about calcium ions is because when you activate a muscle fiber, if you
activate it electrically from the central nervous system, then what happens is the electrical signal
travels along the cell membrane, goes down inside the transverse tubule and triggers the release of
calcium ions into the fiber.
So you're basically converting electrical signals into chemical signals to make the fiber do the
cross bridge formations that produce force.
So it's kind of like a communication process.
The issue is the calcium ions when they enter the muscle fiber, they don't just tell the actins and
myosins to bind with each other to produce use force, they also trigger a whole bunch of other
processes which create fatigue.
And so I kind of call these calcium ion related fatigue mechanisms.
Now during the exercise, what you're going to have is a couple of calcium I'm relative mechanisms.
One of them which is called excitation contraction coupling failure, which is where the
communication process breaks down.
So you kind of you fragment the the Trident junction and the electrical signal arriving no longer
produces a kind of a signal internally to produce cross produce.
And that's a little tiny damage mechanism essentially.
I mean, we call it excitation contraction coupling failure because it's a failure of the excitation
contraction coupling process.
But the reality is it's damage to a little protein that holds the junction in place.
So we get this tiny damage mechanism.
You can also get a little damage mechanism on the surface of the cell membrane that's produced by
when the mitochondria are dealing with calcium mines, they will produce reactive oxygen species
which trigger the release of protease which damages cell membrane and that then prevents electrical
signals from transversing the muscle cell membrane.
Now interestingly, very quickly, a lot of the time when we see reductions in electromyography
readings, it could be because of this cell membrane excitability reduction.
So we've got to be careful when we kind of try to deduce what's happening from a sort of central
nervous system point of view into what's happening on the muscular point of view, because you can
get reductions in EMG signals because of this activation failure locally rather than centrally.
So anyway, so you've got these mechanisms happening during the workout which are creating a
reduction in muscle fiber force.
Again, when you hit the post workout period, the calcium and accumulation has triggered the release
of protease as we start damaging the myofibrils and that's when you start to see what we would call
as muscle damage happening.
But that's happening in the post workout period.
That's not happening during exercise.
When that protease damage starts to kind of settle down, you then have an inflammatory process which
clears away all of that damage, creating essentially even more damage in the sense that you've got
to think of this inflammatory process as a clearing away process.
I like to call it a Pac-Man process because it the kind of the macrophages come in and just eat
stuff, but basically it's a clearing away process.
You're clearing away all the process and then after that's happened, you're then going to start
building new myofibrils.
This is essentially the heart of the problem that I've been battling with some people on social
media recently where they've been trying to tell me that damage gets repaired before hypertrophy can
happen.
I'm like, well, we know that hypertrophy happens in day one after a single set exercise because my
OPS comes down to baseline after like 2930 hours.
But we also know that damages any damage that's happening is getting basically occurring in that
first 12 to 24 hours.
So damage can't actually occur before I'd repair can't actually happen before hypertrophy is being
processed because the damage hasn't even happened at the point where the hypertrophy is already done
so or at least not all of it.
So what happens?
You've got these two two phase process Cal pains proteases causing damage to my febrials followed by
separately secondarily this inflammatory process.
So what I've just done that very, very quickly is describe three key post workout fatigue
mechanisms, all deriving from calcium and accumulation.
Firstly, you've got excitation contraction, coupling failure.
Secondly, you've got damage to the cell membrane preventing conduct ability of the action
potentials.
And thirdly, you've got the myofibrilla damage.
So very, very briefly, what's happening here is that the cell membrane excitability reduction and
the excitation congestion coupling failure are switching the muscle fibre off internally.
They're stopping you from actually creating cross bridges completely.
The fibre just won't do anything, won't produce a mechanical tension at all if you've created either
of those two fatigue mechanisms.
What's the timeline when?
When do those two mechanisms?
Excitation contraction coupling failure is happening inside of a workout.
So if you do a set to failure with, we'll get into Rep ranges in a moment.
But if you do a set to failure with a sort of a Rep range that's kind of above 5/6, 7:00-ish, you're
going to have some excitation contraction coupling failure happening then.
But you have a bunch of sets in that situation, you're going to start to see some rain damage as
well, so it's slightly delayed in comparison.
And that's muscle specific, obviously.
That's fibre specific, that's muscle fibre specific because we're talking about individual fibres
experiencing that issue.
But if you're doing full body and you do, you take a set to failure with tender repetitions and then
you go to another another.
Totally relevant.
And yeah, exactly.
And then thirdly, the third of the three mechanisms I've described is this muscle myofibrilla
damage.
And of course that, you know, you could still be activating a fibre at that point, but you don't
have as many fibre myofibrils, therefore, because you're damaged some of them and the protease
basically causes damage, but then the inflammation just clears it away completely takes the
myofibril out.
We talk about repair, and I mentioned this a whole bunch of times, but we talk about repair, but
it's not really repair, it's replacement.
So you can't really think of the repair process as like you might, for example, if you've got a
shelf that you need to repair in the house, you kind of look at it and you tinker about it and you
fix the thing that's missed.
That's not how repair processes work inside muscle fibers.
The analogy in this situation would be you would take the old shelf down, remove it, throw it away
and put a new one in place.
That's it's a replacement process, not a repair process really.
So that's our three key post workout fatigue mechanisms that are happening inside the muscle fiber
and they're all going to be basically triggered initially by the calcium and accumulation.
Now you can have like you mentioned earlier central nervous system fatigue.
The reason that happens is because the inflammation that is creating this second wave of damage, I
mentioned that earlier, the second wave of damage creates the secondary loss in strength, that
inflammation gets into the bloodstream, creates a sensation in the brain, produces supraspinal
CNSPD.
Now that is going to be whole body because it's the brain level phenomenon.
So what we've got here is 3 localized T mechanism which are fibre specific and a whole body CNFT
mechanism which is going to affect everything.
Now that is only going to kick in when the information kicks in, which is going to be, you know, 6
to 12 hours post workout.
Finally, if you really want completeness, you can also say well if I've got post workout fatigue
locally and a muscle, I'm also going to have a coordination disruption.
Now that's something for the athletes to worry about.
That's not something for the bodybuilders to think about South at least 4 mechanisms plus one if you
want to think about it from an athletic perspective, right?
So that's the Super quick version of post workout fatigue in a nutshell.
The reason I'm explaining this now from a repetition range point of view is that different Rep
ranges are going to create different amounts of calcium ion accumulation in the Moss fibers.
So if you literally just do a couple of repetitions, you're not giving the Moss fibers enough time
to accumulate calcium ions.
It's literally that simple.
So if I do singles, double S triples, then there's almost no calcium ion accumulation because I
haven't actually activated the Moss fibers for long enough to allow calcium ions to accumulate.
If I start doing higher repetitions and you start to accumulate more and more calcium ions because
you're activating muscle fibers for a longer period of time, that's it.
So if you look across the entire Rep range that we've described today, you go from single all the
way up to 2030 repetitions per set.
All you're doing is changing the amount of time you're spending activating the Ossel fiber and
exposing it to calcium ions and allowing those calcium ions to accumulate.
So if I do low repetitions, I don't allow that to happen.
And if I do high repetitions, I do allow that to happen.
So Rep range is one of the key factors that determines how much post workout fatigue mechanism
you're going to generate.
And as I've described earlier, all of them bottleneck through this calcium and accumulation problem.
So essentially, I think one of the biggest misconceptions in the frameworks that people use when
they think about post workout fatigue is they think, oh, well, I might have this mechanism or I
might have some CNFT or I might have some muscle damage.
It doesn't work like that.
Every single post workout D mechanism comes through calcium and accumulation.
So it's a, it's a, it's a package deal.
You get all of them or you don't get any of them.
So it's like you get the excitation, congestion, covering failure.
And if you've got that because you've accumulated calcium I, you must also have to some degree some
cell memory damage.
And if you've got that, you must also have some myofibil damage because you've created some
proteases in response to the calcium I accumulation.
The ways of training that would cause more like you, you couldn't sort of cause more of one
particular type.
Because it all bottlenecks through the same original phenomenon.
It's actually, although when people listen to me talk about this stuff, they go, oh wow, that's
really complicated.
I'm like, yeah, but just stick with it for 2 minutes.
Because when you get to the end of the explanation, what you realize is it actually is really simple
because it all coalesces into a single problem, which is if you are creating also calcium and
accumulation during the workout, then you're going to create a lot of post workout fatigue.
All of the mechanisms just it's a package deal.
So a set of 20 being more fatiguing or causing fatigue to last longer than a set of 10, is that
because there's more muscle fibres that are experiencing this excessive amounts of of calcium ion
accumulation then?
It's not that there's more muscle fibres, because if you train to failure then you're probably
seeing a very similar number of fibres being activated, it's the duration to which they're being
activated.
But then presumably kind of failure is going to cause the the massive fibres of the highest
threshold mode units to be active for a similar duration.
So is it that there's other fibres that are active for longer and that's.
Exactly, exactly.
So you're basically you're continuing to the point where because the easiest way to think about it
is the other way around.
So if you start with where your fatigue levels have to be at the end of the set in order to fail,
that kind of helps.
So if you're imagining right, you've got a sort of a 15 Rep Max and you think you've got a
calculation that allows you to establish and that's approximately 70% of your one Rep Max.
In other words, you've got to reduce your strength by 30% to get to the point where that 70% of 1
Rep Max is now impossible for you to lift.
That's, that's the, the process you kind of got to go through.
So like that 30%, obviously there's going to be a chunk of central nervous system fatigue associated
with the exercise that you've just done.
There's going to be some metabolite related D and there's going to be some of this calcium I related
D.
Essentially what we're saying is that because of that larger percentage, because if I just do like
A5 Rep Max, which is 90%, then I've only got to drop strength by 10%.
The big chunk of that is metabolites, a little bit of CNS D you can, I'm done.
I mean, there's almost no calcium I related D at all.
But if I push onwards and try and do 10 Rep maxes and 15 Rep maxes and now I've got a 70% and I've
got to find that extra 20% of reduction in strength, a big chunk of that's going to come from
calcium.
I'm relative fatigue and the reason for that is because if you look at the individual fatigue
mechanisms during a set, CNS fatigue and metabolite related fatigue and calcium, the the metabolite
related fatigue is fastest.
So if you're only doing a couple of reps, you get it all from metabolite related fatigue.
If you're doing a few more reps, you're going to get some from CNS fatigue as well.
And if you do some more, you're going to and it sort of just works like that in the sense that the
fewer repetitions you do, the more you're going to get from metabolite related, the less you're
going to get from calcium.
I hope people follow that because what you say is you can get a failure through different
repetitions and what's getting into failures Ultimately different types of fatigue.
The the fatigue mechanisms vary depending on how long you're exercising for.
So if you were to just literally measure everything from one Max through to a marathon run can you
can literally just see the change in fatigue mechanisms as you go through that sequence.
So it's exactly the opposite way around from what most people think, literally the opposite.
So if I look at the one Max, what's the thing that causes me to experience fatigue in one Max?
It's metabolites.
It's nothing else.
If I start to do double S and singles, sorry, double s and triples as well as my singles, then I'm
going to start to see a bit of CNFT creeping in there, just a little bit, start to do more
repetitions.
You can start to see some calcium.
I'm related to T creeping in there as well.
If you push things right the way up through the Rep range and you get all the way through the top
end of the light load and out the other side to the point where you've now no longer got any
vascular occlusion happening.
So now you can't accumulate metabolizing.
You don't have metabolite related to T.
Now what happens?
Very interesting is that the number of reps you can achieve suddenly skyrockets for a given
percentage.
On re/max, it skyrockets.
You can now do loads more repetitions and that then starts to change the thing completely.
And ultimately it pushes all of the fatigue now across to the central nervous system.
Because ultimately you can always kind of just do one more repetition if you put your mind to it.
And then you end up in the scenario where pretty much 50 to 70% of your actual fatigue you're
experiencing is super spinal in nature.
So when we look at fatigue across the entire range of human activities and there's almost no CNFT in
a heavy load one Rep Max and there's pretty much exclusively CNS fatigue at the upper end of the
spectrum.
So you could basically have like a bar, like a 100% bar and whether using 151020, you could have X
percent is coming from this fatigue, X percent coming from metabolite to Kalman.
That would be, yeah.
So failure is not failure, you know, like obviously.
What failure is failure is always the same thing.
And this is the again, an argument I get into with people because they're like, oh, well, muscular
failure is when the muscle can't produce enough force and like, well, yes and no, yes and no.
I mean, technically from the outside it's going to look like that, but the reason you hit failure is
because you reach the maximum tolerable perception of effort.
You can see this happening like this very famous endurance runners, ultra endurance runners who can
run for days and days and days and days.
And they're basically when you put one against the other, it's literally just a mind game.
It's like who can psych the other one out?
Because ultimately you can always do one more step.
There's nothing really stopping you doing more one step.
If you're motivated enough, if you increase the tolerable perception effort, if you suffer pain to a
greater extent, then you'll just be able to do that extra step.
And so it becomes this really crazy situation where people can push and push themselves to
absolutely insane limits.
Now you don't see that as visibly at the other end of the spectrum, but it's still there.
It's just the, the the magnitude of effect is much smaller, Many, many, many orders of magnitude
smaller, but it's still there.
So ultimately we're always hitting muscular failure, task failure because of the maximum tolerable
perception of effort.
It's just much less visible at the high intensity end of the spectrum.
The consequence I guess from a post workout perspective is, is quite different.
Now you've, you've given us timelines as to when these start to occur, but you haven't really
touched on how, how do they differ in how long they persist for in terms of excitation,
construction, coupling failure or my federal repair or replacement?
What's the difference in in?
So excitation contraction coupling failure seems to have a fairly tight boundary around it.
I mean, I'm sure there are studies showing that it runs longer or shorter.
But generally speaking, if we measure excitation contraction coupling failure after a workout, it
usually sticks around for say, somewhere between two and four days.
Two, at the obviously sort of end of the spectrum where we're dealing with normal strength training
and you're going to push it up to maybe four days if you do a little bit of eccentric overload in
there.
The damage to the cell membrane is is contentious.
It really depends on what data you look at.
If you look at data which is measured just the cell membrane excitability directly, it tends to go
away quite quickly within probably about six hours.
So it maybe isn't a post workout team mechanism that we need to worry about too much.
But other data, indirect data suggests that you could have sort of quite a permeable cell membrane
for a couple of days post workout.
So in that case it might fall in the same category as excitation, congestion, coupling, fair.
It doesn't really matter because and the two are doing the same thing.
So whether it's excitation contraction, coupling failure or both excitation contraction, coupling
failure and cell membrane damage, loss of cycle and excitability, it doesn't really matter because
they're doing the same thing.
They're both switching off the fibre.
You can't load a fibre that you can't switch on.
Again, just let me emphasize this a moment when people say oh, you worry too much about post vocal
fatigue.
No, I'm not worrying about post vocal fatigue.
I'm worrying about being able to stimulate the fibre and I can't stimulate the fibre if it can't
switch it on.
Post workout.
Muscle damage through the calpain process, the protease process followed by the inflammatory
process.
Those are really interesting concepts because they literally expand and contract according to the
magnitude of exposure to calcium ions.
If you expose the muscle flowers to a very small amount of calcium, you're going to have a tiny
amount of muscle damage.
It's going to get cleared out within a day or two.
You can push that process to silly extents.
So obviously this is not done in human studies, but you can do it in animal studies and you can see
3 or 4 weeks worth of muscle damage.
It takes that long to fix The problem generally doesn't take longer than that because what we have,
again, I think a bit of a terminology issue, but exercise scientists differentiate between muscle
fibre repair and muscle fibre regeneration technically, and again, fitness industry doesn't do this,
but exercise science does.
So exercise science will say muscle fiber repair is when you keep the existing muscle fiber and you
just replace bits of it that are damaged.
Like the example I gave the shelf.
You take the shelf essentially down and you put a new shelf up.
That's the repair process as it stands.
Regeneration is where you would like keeping the same analogy, you would knock the whole house down
and build a new house.
So regeneration is where basically the old fiber goes necrotic inside the cell membrane, completely
dies.
You clear it all the way, it's absolutely completely gone apart from the cell membrane, and you
completely build a new muscle fiber inside the old space and that is regeneration.
It complete and utter rebuilding of a fiber from the ground up and the only thing you keep is the
cell membrane.
That's regeneration.
And the house goes back smaller in that scenario.
Well, that's an interesting question.
I mean, I don't actually know and I don't think anybody has really done any work to establish what
that would look like.
You end up with a new Moss fiber inside the old cell membrane.
How many myofibrons you end up with, I could not say, but you end up with a new cell membrane,
sorry, a new fiber inside the old submarine.
The reason I mentioned this is because regeneration tends to take about four or five weeks to
happen.
So in that scenario, we would say that we're highly unlikely to see repair processes push past that
number of weeks because if the fiber detects that the amount of damage is so catastrophic that it's
going to take four or five weeks to do all of the repairing, then why bother?
You know, makes no sense.
Just regenerate the fiber and start again.
So, and interestingly, I was looking at this yesterday because I was a little bit aggravated by
people saying that muscle damage doesn't happen in trained lifters.
I actually went and found a whole bunch of data showing regenerating muscle fibers inside power
lifters.
So biopsies were taken of very high level power lifters and you can actually see regenerating fibers
inside their muscles.
Now that's really interesting because basically that says you can get catastrophic level damage on a
fiber by fiber basis in people who have high levels of voluntary activation, who are very well
strength trained, large amounts of muscle mass and perhaps their muscle fibers at the top end of
their motuna pool were being accessed.
They're very fast twitch, very vulnerable to these calcium I'm related fatigue mechanisms.
You can get essentially A regenerating fibers in those situations.
So totally and utterly invalidates this idea that, you know, trained people.
I don't get muscle damage.
I don't know where this idea comes from, but I see it all.
Now I've got a couple of questions and I want to stick with the fatigue before I ask you a more
application based question.
But in terms of so you know you sort of when the fatigue make it at the start when how long they
like to last for and that they're kind of all being driven by the same thing by calcium and
accumulation.
So we've sort of talked about different Rep ranges influencing that.
Do we want to touch on anything else that's influencing that as well?
I think it's worth mentioning, and just so that we've got to reference here.
So basically there are, you know, kind of five things.
And I've done a bunch of articles on my FAQ to list these out and they're all available if people
want to look into it in more detail.
But essentially Rep brains is just one of those five.
So obviously proximity to failure is going to work more or less the same way as Rep brains.
So if you start leaving reps in reserve, then you're going to dial things back a little bit.
Now the interesting thing here is that if you recall a moment ago, we were talking about how the
different fatigue mechanisms have different appearances in time over the course of a strength
training set.
So if I do double s or singles or even triples, basically because metabolite related fatigue is so
much faster in its appearance than the other fatigue mechanisms, I just end up with metabolite
related fatigue happening and nothing else.
The same thing kind of happens if you start taking reps in reserve.
So because calcium I'm related fatigue is back ended in the set, I can really miss a lot of it by
just leaving a rapporteur in reserve.
And I've pointed out to people that if they're doing moderate loads and they leave 2 reps in
reserve, they can pretty much avoid the majority if not all of that calcinear related fatigue.
If you're doing heavy loads, you probably only need to leave one Rep reserve.
So I really, really like the kind of sort of five Rep Max with one Rep reserve, something like that.
Doing 4 reps with A5 Rep Max I think is a brilliant, brilliant sweet spot.
Really, really does mitigate a lot of that of that problem.
So proximity to fail is the first one I would look at.
Volume, of course, obviously, you do a whole string of sets.
You can end up with more exposure of Moss fibers to calcium ions because you're activating for a
longer period of time.
So those are the kind of like the three that I would say are duration driven.
So essentially volume, proximity to failure and Rep range.
All you're saying here is how long are you activating these muscle fibres for that?
That's really all we're saying.
The other two are caused by a different phenomenon.
They're caused by stretch.
So essentially you've got the resistance profile or how you're conducting the exercise such that you
know, are you activating the muscle fibres in the stretch position or not.
Basically, if you are, then you're going to have the opening of stretch activated 9 channels.
That's going to cause accumulation of calcium ions through a different mechanism and you're
basically just going to turbo charge the problem that you've got.
So I like to say to people, imagine doing something like, I don't know, a couple of sets of heavy
hip thrusts versus one set of high Rep squats.
They're just completely and utterly different animals when it comes to post worker fatigue because
you've got this kind of heavy load situation with your hip thrust where you've got a contract
position exercise.
You're not going to get a lot of post worker fatigue from that.
Your high reps of squats, stretch position, high repetitions.
Again, you could modify that further and say, well, you know, leave a Rep and reserve on the hip
thrusts and are trained to failure on the squats.
There's literally a perfect kind of combination to see the difference in post workout.
So stretch really big deal.
And then of course, just finalizing this, if you start messing around with the eccentric phase,
either making it really long in duration or overloading it by using extra weight, you're going to
end up with a lot more post workout fatigue as well.
Because again, you're exposing a lot more fibers to stretch or exposing those if I was to stretch
and for a longer duration of time.
So that's the five basic features.
That's essentially the only things that are going to drive post workout fatigue from a point of view
of this set of calcium I'm related mechanisms.
So if you're doing a short position exercise, do you think potentially you could do actually an
extra set than what you would be?
Doing well, that's it.
I mean, that's, you know, historically, you know, we've talked about this idea of volumizing at
those kind of exercises.
So, you know, if, if, if somebody would say to me, look, I, you know, I want to do more volume, then
be like, OK, we'll pick, pick exercises.
Yeah, exactly.
Pick exercises that have those contractor positions.
And if you look at the leverage curve, you can generally find something that would work.
Not always.
I mean, you can't do that with a gas.
It's not going to happen.
But you can do it with many muscles.
You can find a range of motion or a position or what have you that will advantage that muscle but
still keep it close to the contract event.
So you've mentioned, you know, people often say, oh, who cares if you're fatigued, it's not going to
make that sort of difference.
So, you know, fatigue may even help.
As far as I purge for you, they're all kind of misconceptions for me, an actual kind of outcome
base.
I know you know it's hard to quantify some of this, but if you were to say, OK, we've got if fatigue
as being a measurable reduction in a temporary reduction performance.
We've got someone who is in this post worker fatigue period where there is a couple percent
reduction in their performance capacity.
What is actually happening that's going to negatively impact hypertrophy?
Just so people all clear why this matters.
So if we're talking about post workout fatigue, which is today's kind of focus, then we're only
talking about these sort of four or five post workout fatigue mechanisms.
So we've got cell membrane damage, excitation, congestion, coupling failure, myofibrillar damage,
the CNS fatigue caused by the inflammatory process.
And then as I said, the fifth one is coordination disruption, if you're an athlete and you need to
worry about that.
So ignoring the athletic one, we've got these 4 mechanisms, the excitation contraction, coupling
failure and the cell membrane damage.
Literally switch off the muscle fibre so you can activate it and nothing will happen internally.
So you're not getting cross bridge formations, which means you're not getting mechanical tension,
which means you're not going to be able to stimulate that fibre to grow.
So if those mechanisms are present and you come back and train the muscle again, the fibres they're
experiencing, those fatigue mechanisms will just ignore you.
Literally, they just don't even know that you're training because they're not being activated.
My fibrillar damage is a little bit of a grey area because if it's present and you're reducing the
number of my fibrals to reducing the number of cross bridges, you're reducing the amount of tension.
So that's not actually switching the fibre off, it's just kind of reducing the amount of force
production.
Now if you want to get really granular, you can say, well, there's other damage as well and that's
interfering within force transmission.
Again, it's just the same thing, just reduces the tension of the The annoying one is the CNS
fatigue, because that's created by the inflammatory response and it's triggered by the brain
perceiving the presence of that information.
Now the reason that's annoying, it's because it doesn't just affect the fibres that you've damaged,
it affects the whole body.
So if you've done this is ultimately the issue with bro splits.
So if you go in the gym and you smash a muscle to bits with your bro split training program and you
come back the following day and you train a different muscle group, that inflammation that you've
created in that previous day's workout is going to hamper your ability to hit high levels of
recruitment in a completely different muscle the following day.
And that's the annoying one, because that's the one everyone ignores when they're putting programs.
And that's effectively it's almost falling into the same categories, the first two types of fatigue
you're talking about because it's maybe you're not actually activating those muscle fibers.
It works the same way from the muscles perspective in the sense that the two calcium mechanisms we
mentioned, they switch the fibers off that are affected by that fatigue mechanism.
The Super spinal fatigue effect does that same thing, but it does it to every muscle in the body the
same way.
So you can smash your calves and next day you go to your biceps and there's going to be a reduction
in the amount of muscle.
I wouldn't pick those two muscles as an example really, because those are the ones I've, I mean,
calves are not going to get that easily damaged and biceps have got such a hypolentric.
Division maybe we go the other way where we say biceps and then come back the next day and do your
calves.
That would be a much better example.
Yeah.
If you do an arm day and then you come back the following day and try and train another muscle
group, you're not going to get the same level of recruitment that you would do if you'd had a day
off the day before.
So you know, and again, this is this is like very, very obvious mechanistic logic that we're using
here.
We're not sort of justice making stuff up.
We're looking and saying what is the stimulus for this adaption?
Well, it has to be activating the fiber and mechanically loading it.
That's not contentious.
Yeah, it's not contentious.
So you said hypertrophy, I think you said this last week.
If you know we would remember one thing.
It's hypertrophy is muscle fibre specific.
And so in this situation, you're saying you're literally switching off the fibre.
Like it cannot experience this mechanical tension, it cannot experience a, a stimulus for growth.
Now, is there any way of quantifying like are we talking one fibre?
Are we talk like how do we, how can you possibly get your head around what kind of practical impact
that might have?
So generally speaking, you can extrapolate from the like the fact that muscle fibers produce very
similar forces if they're of the same cross-sectional area.
So muscle fibre type, a lot of people think that fibre type effects force production.
It doesn't really that much.
So you can have a slow twitch fibre of a certain diameter and a fast twitch fibre of the same
diameter and they'll produce very similar forces. 510% difference really.
Now shortening velocity is a different animal that's massively different.
Again, athletic problem, not a bodybuilding problem.
So that being said, if you have a post workout fatigue reduction and you can measure that as a
percentage change, then you can get a handle on how much of your muscle mass is being affected by
fatigue mechanisms.
Because ultimately the fatigue mechanisms start at the most fast rich end of the spectrum and they
work their way down because the more fast rich a fibre is, the less capabilities of handling, sorry,
calcium ions because of the mitochondrial content.
So if you have a lot of mitochondria and a muscle fibre, it will just deal with calcium ions and not
let them accumulate.
If you don't have as much mitochondria, it won't let you do that and you'll end up with accumulating
calcium ions very quickly.
So you can basically just say, well, this is my muscle and I'm dividing it into like 100% worth of
fibres.
If I come back the following day and I've reduced strength by thirty, 4050%, I mean generally
speaking, post work appetite doesn't get much more than 50%.
You can get worse than that, but that is specific populations of people that have a lot of fast food
fibres.
You go on the following day, maybe you've dropped strength by 30%, which is a lot.
That basically tells you that you've kind of lost access to about 30% of the muscle more or less.
Now whether that's happened due to calcium I'm related to locally or due to metabolite, sorry, due
to superspinal fatigue due to inflammation responses is difficult to ascertain.
But if I mean, you can kind of do it by maybe looking at non local fatigue is a really, really nice
one.
But if you say do like a really horrible knee extension workout with only one leg and you come back
the following day and you measure fatigue in both legs and you've got like a 30% drop in strength in
one leg and a 10% drop in strength in the other leg.
That tells you you've got like, you know, 10% of like a third of your post workout fatigue is
superspinal and the other two thirds is local more or less.
So I think that's one way you could do that.
But basically you're kind of saying that if you've got a 30% strength drop, then 30% of your muscle
fibers are not really playing ball with you the following day.
Because I often hear people say, oh, you know, some of these fatigue studies, there's only, you
know, 4 percent, 5% drop in, in performance.
And it's like, well, what you've just said there is that's still going to be very significant if
your goal is to maximize hypertrophy.
If you're an advanced lifter who's only really capable of growing the muscle fibers at the top end
of the motor unit pool and that could be your 4% that you're trying to train.
I mean, so, you know, I think again, it's about saying what is actually happening.
You know, I've, I've rambled on a lot today, so I don't want to ramble on too much more.
But it just occurs to me that a lot of the time when I have disagreements with people on social
media, they can't actually tell me how this stuff, they think this stuff works.
So I'm like, this is how my model works.
I'm working through this logically.
Here's the beginning, here's the end.
And this is the reasons why I think it.
And then the other person will be like, I disagree with him.
Like, OK, well, how do you think it works then?
Crickets.
And he's like, well, no, come on.
I mean, like, if you're putting yourself out there and you trying to, you know, take part in this
discussion, at least tell me what you think is happening.
And I don't get an answer like, well, you know, I'm open to talking about this stuff, but I need to
hear an opposing position because I'm not going to throw my position out the window just because you
don't like it if you can't give me something better, you know.
So I think that's ultimately where I'm always coming from.
It's like, let's create a model, let's work it through logically and let's figure out what we think
is going on and if there's bits wrong with it, let's try and fix that.
But what I'm not going to do is throw the whole thing out the window just because somebody else
doesn't like it, which is happening more and more recently, but so will give me an alternative.
Then so this stuff is significant, like if your goals to maximize growth, this really matters.
And you can find like you've published, you've, you've put out tables and, and stuff showing this
stuff.
So people can see at what point are these fatigue mechanisms in place and how big these reductions.
Like you can find this information relatively easily.
So the last question I've got here is we've talked about singles, double s, triples, even fours.
You can do many sets of these things.
These are still stimulating hypertrophy.
Like people who are aware of your model, they know that well, ultimately those last five year
petitions, give or take to failure, should all be maximally stimulating.
They should all contribute to hypertrophy.
If you're doing double S, you're doing triples, you're stimulating hypertrophy.
Does this mean we can just all go train with, you know, 10 sets of two and stimulate more growth in
your conventional sets of eights, 2, three sets of 8 to 12 kind of training program?
So physiologically, yes, practically it's not going to be very much fun.
So, you know, I think ultimately there are reasons why people don't do it.
You know, there are people out there who can absolutely do it biomechanically suited to it.
But I think generally speaking, it's not a lot of fun to try and train like that.
I think the sweet spot, as I say, is in that kind of four to six Rep zone.
You know, I think that's probably the the place where the weight is not creating other problems, but
at the same time is also not creating a lot of post workout fatigue.
I think we've just got to, you know, sort of look at the traditional moderate load Rep range,
traditional traditional.
Obviously we're looking at Ridge Park here and he's working with three to five and Sandow obviously
they're probably lifting a lot heavier.
But the issue is we've kind of got ourselves into this zone where we tend to use moderate loads and
I think we just need to correct downwards a notch.
I'm not going to be the one who goes out there and tells us people to live with a singles, double S
and triples.
I don't think it makes sense practically.
But I do think working at the lower end of the moderate load Rep range, you know, if we say that's 6
to 15, I think working at the lower end of that six and seven is really going to make a big
difference to a lot of people.
It's going to be a lot easier to recover from the workouts they're doing.
I like working in the four to six zone.
I think it's a really nice sweet spot.
I think just moving down from 6 to 4 is a huge, huge shift in post workout fatigue.
But again, not everyone's going to tolerate that.
Not everyone's going to want to do that.
I think it's going to come down to that balance between what people feel comfortable doing and safe
and you know, not getting soft tissue discomfort, but at the same time managing that post workout
fatigue.
And everyone's going to have an individual sweet spot, you know, I think for that.
But generally I would say if you've got a moderate load rate range of 6 to 15 and you start moving
from the top end of that down to the bottom end of that, I think that will make a big difference to
people post workout fatigue.
I don't think that's too heavy for the majority of situations.
A couple of thoughts I have on it and I'm interested to hear if if you think anything differently
about this.
So I do program low repetition sets for my hypertrophy clients.
And again, at the start of this podcast, I said I love that combination of of Steve and Reggie's
program.
And one of my favorite ways to train is actually to alternate those two.
So do one day or single set work and that'll usually be in that sort of eight to 10 repetition
range, sometimes even higher because again, based on, you know, weight availability of the machine
or whatever, I'll just use the stack and just do AMIRAP or whatever.
But I'm doing single sets and then I'll go on the alternate day.
I tend to do sort of like a three by 5 or you know, 4 to 5, whatever.
And what I find with that is obviously your ability to use as many exercise variations in that
second heavier workout.
You know, that's going to be limited because you know, multi sets is going to be a very long
workout.
But obviously you know, if you're using more compound lifts, if you're training at home or whatever,
that's going to be a very effective workout.
Now, when I am programming this stuff with clients, a couple of points to make.
So firstly, if we are using say sub five repetitions, we don't need to be using if you're doing
double S or triples, you don't need to be using your two three repetition Max like you can be using
a five year Max.
So you know, a lot of the criticism here is all if I'm doing double S triples, it's so, so heavy and
it'll load it so much.
Well, no, you need to load it the same as you would load a set of.
So from a loading perspective, it's not only more, it's difficult.
Exactly, because ultimately A5 Rep Max is going to be stimulating on the first Rep, So you can
absolutely just do a bunch of five Rep maxes and singles or double S and I think that's probably the
most elegant way of addressing the problem.
So then the other thing is that obviously allows you to volumize like you're talking about before.
So if you did have a priority muscle, a priority lift or whatever, you could do 5678 sets, whatever
with that five ref Max, but you're doing double s and triples and you can effectively get more
stimulating volume in that workout than you would otherwise.
Again, a limitation here.
If people listen to me say that well and think, well, I'm going to go do that for every exercise,
Well, you can only do it for so many exercises.
Otherwise you'll be doing 60 sets in a workout, right?
So time is going to be a limitation, but either you could pick 456 exercises and do that within a
single session and then have your longest session, 20 different exercises, whatever the other day or
and what I often program is one or two exercises in a session where we do this and then we do all
our exercises as single sets.
So that's why I'm using it.
And then the other thing I'm using it for is exercises where I say something like a squat, a hat
squat, A pendulum squat.
If I simply or, or something that's, you know, easily damageable, very, very sort of cardiovascular
demanding as well.
Like if I'm doing a pendulum squat and I'm doing a set of 10, that is just going to kind of ruin
that session for me.
Like I'm going to need to wait, you know, 10 minutes before that's not going to be affecting my next
set.
So for me, I would prefer to lower that pendulum squat, super heavy, do well in a five year Max, do
double s with it.
I get my 3 four sets out of double S and that's going to take much less of a toll and impact the
rest of my workout a hell of a lot less if I'm doing one or two sets of 10.
Totally.
You know, I think no, yeah, absolutely.
I think there's, there's, there's a lot of creative ways to, I've worked with this information.
It definitely starts to go off the top end of what I'm kind of focused on though.
So it's like, I could listen to you talk about this stuff and I'm like, yeah, that makes a lot of
sense.
And my brain is just wandering thinking about Calciumite.
It's it's just like, I think again, it's I'm always, I'm always interested.
I'm always kind of curious to see how this model gets implemented.
And it's really cool to see the different solutions that you come up with and other people come up
with.
But it's, it's really not something that I think I'm ever going to really try and do.
It's just not my wheelhouse.
I know if it's difficult to explain to people that I'm just, I'm trying to solve the problem of the
Physiology and people try and put me in a box.
I get this in my Instagram questions.
Actually, I do an Instagram questions every Saturday.
And a lot of the questions I get or many of the questions I get tend to assume that, well, I feel
like they're putting me in a box with other people, all that they recognise doing some of the things
and they go, oh, well, you're like this person or you're like this person.
I'm like, well, I'm really not because pretty much every person you are on that list is selling a
training, you know, and pretty much everybody is trying to get you to train in a particular way that
they think is right.
And I'm not trying to do that.
I'm trying to teach you a physiological model that explains how all of this stuff works.
So I'm not in that box.
I'm in a different box, you know, and yes, I can interact with people that are doing those things
and I do enjoy doing that, but ultimately their creativity is around the programme design side of
things.
My creativity is trying to figure out how this stuff works on a physiological level.
So, you know, I'm always going to just kind of be a little bit behind the curve when it comes to
programme design, that kind of thing.
I'm so I'm just, it doesn't light me up the way that it lights other people up.
I think it's, it's helpful nonetheless to, to come to you and be like, does this make sense
physiologically?
And we're not, you know, I'm not saying that's what I'm exactly, exactly.
And I'm not saying that what I've just suggested are the only way to do things.
You know, obviously, like you've said, the model can be applied in, in ways we haven't discussed.
And that's sort of out there for people to think about and creatively engage with and and utilise.
So at no point are we trying to put a limitation and say it has to be used in this way.
Exactly, exactly.
And I think a lot of people are surprised when they say they send me a like a programme or a workout
and they go, you know, they go, you know, is this, is this going to work?
And I'm like, yeah, probably.
And I think they expect me to go, no, you should not do it like this.
You should do it like this way that I have said is the only possible way you can do it because they
they see other people doing that because everyone's got their own little pet programs that they want
to kind of advance.
I'm like, well, no, I mean, I think it would solve the problem.
And you can have better and worse kind of solutions and you can have more creative and less creative
solutions.
But ultimately, from my perspective, I can tell you physiologically what's going on and then whether
there might be ways you could change it in a given direction to make it better.
But ultimately, I'm not going to be standing there going, no, you must program like this or you must
program like that.
I will say to people that if their program has a very low frequency of training each muscle that
they're losing out by doing that.
And that's a choice that I wouldn't make.
But I'll equally be able to tell them whether I think the net hypertrophy of the week is going to
exist or not based on the the data we got.
Anyway, we're kind of a long way away from the purpose of this podcast.
At this point, we are.
We are.
But hopefully people find it helpful and interesting.
And the final point I want to make on that is why I find this conversation so helpful because again,
like you said, it's not something that lights you up.
But I still force you to talk about this stuff with me all the time because I remember talking to
someone once and and they were amused.
Oh, and they said if someone asked me to write a song, I'd be like, where the hell do I start?
What, what kind of song?
But if they say I want a song about this or like this in this timing signature or whatever, they
give them some guideline, then like, oh man, I've got so many ideas.
And that's how this works for me.
When I think about programming, it's like, well, actually having these conversations with you over
time has just expanded the possibilities.
And it's like, wow, there's so many creative ways to use this model, take it, apply it, shape it,
and come up with new ways of doing training that makes sense as opposed to just not even knowing
where to start.
I think that's, that's a really nice way of putting and I hope that and I, I would be very happy if
people were to do that.
I mean, I think, you know, that the model is not designed to be constrictive.
It's designed to be a facilitator.
You know, it's to, as you say, it's designed to facilitate saying, look, any, anything that you do
that fulfills these criteria will work, you know, and, and that, that hopefully is liberating rather
than being constricting.
I think a lot of people, I mean, I get this criticism.
People say, oh, Chris just says you've got to train in this way, otherwise it won't work.
I literally see that being said all the time.
And I've never said anything like that at all.
You're not listening to what I'm saying.
You know, I'm saying this is how the Physiology works.
If you can't figure out a way of training programming within that framework, then I'm sorry, that's
not my problem.
You know, that's, that's a lack of imagination because I think the problem is actually that the
framework is actually really clear.
But anyway, that's, that's a complaint.
I'm just complaining at this point.
So stop me talking.
And that's.
OK, we're done, we're done.
Thank you guys for tuning in, sticking with us for our gambling.
Hopefully you enjoyed the episode and hopefully join us again for another episode.