Episode: 018 Pauses, Stretching, and Partials
URL: https://open.spotify.com/episode/2Fn98tk8qR6kFPGaeliYGG
Published: 2025-09-22
================================================================================

Welcome back everyone to another episode of Hypertrophy, past and present.
Chris, how are you doing today?
I'm doing very well.
Thanks, Jake.
I'm also doing well, but I'm a little bit sick.
Well, I'm actually feeling fairly good.
I've just lost my voice a little bit.
So if I sound a little bit off today, that's why I do apologize ahead of time, but hopefully my
voice does hold out.
Now let's jump straight into it.
I've got a well.
Let me take a step back for a moment.
I'm ongoing dilemma that people have struggled with forever is how to build their cars and I still
see this online today.
People talk about is it genetic?
Is it not genetic?
Do you need to do something special?
What do you do about it?
How do you do it?
Is it and what I find very entertaining about this topic is the same conversations are being had
almost a century ago.
There's there was like very early on when the silver era when you had these authors who are writing
courses and plans and books and all these kind of things.
There were books dedicated to how to build your cars.
There were whole whole like a specialization courses on how to build your cars, What can you do?
They were speculating.
There was magazines about it.
There was all kinds of funny things being postulated.
Is it to do with what kind of activities you did when you were a child?
Maybe if you did more cycling, maybe you were able to develop the calf better as an adult.
There was all these funny speculations.
So it's it is a bit of a funny muscle just in, in terms of some people's ability, I guess you
naturally be able to build and develop good cars or not.
And I thought what I'd give you guys today is a early calf specialization phase.
So this comes from Grudge Park, who I thought we'd actually talked about quite a lot, but I went
back over our notes and we've only actually done one of his courses so far.
So there will be more Grudge coming up in the future, I'm sure, but I assume most of you will be
familiar with the name and you probably know Reg for his 5 by 5 system.
And I think we talked a little bit about some of that previously.
But obviously Reg multi Mr. Universe winner, Mr. America winner, he did come back and compete later
on as well.
So he was a mentor to Arnold.
So he kind of previously in in another episode we talked about Sig Klein and we're talking about Sig
sort of sat in this middle ground between the bronze and the silver.
I was saying Reg sort of is on the opposite end.
So Reg kind of SAT, I mean, he was classic silver, but then when he came back, he sort of straddle
this, you know, between silver and golden era.
So some of his latest stuff was kind of more golden era style.
And you know, he was competing in the in the sort of sick.
But his early stuff, we're talking early 50s.
This book that I'm talking about today was published 1952, I believe.
And he was winning universes in 1951 onwards.
So yeah, kind of expand a decent, decent era.
Now, like I said, when we know Reg for his 5 by 5 system, we also know Reg because he was the first
bodybuilder to ever bench 500 lbs.
And this was before anabolics were being used by York or it was, it was actually the same year that
York later started using anabolics.
So there's no reason to believe that.
I mean, there's no reason to believe that dredge was ever enhanced necessarily.
We don't have evidence of that.
But certainly for these early competitions and early achievements, it would seem quite likely.
So he's a very accomplished bodybuilder.
Most people I sort of know in this space would say probably Reg or Steve Reeves would be the two in
that sort of early 50s period that arguably may be the best developed silver area bodybuilders.
And Reg, yeah, I mean, I don't know if he was a marketing inclined entrepreneurial type person a
lot, but he was quite prolific with the, the courses and the the workout programs that he published.
So that makes my life a little bit easier.
It's nice to be able to have some of this stuff recorded because obviously it's, you know, a lot of
the stuff we're referring to is letters and magazine articles are hard to find.
But Reg did publish quite a lot.
So Reggie's calf specialization phase, and obviously he's not saying you should do this, you know,
in lieu of other workouts, like he's saying you do this with your full body stuff.
OK, so you've got a muscle you want to focus on, you add it to your full body routine.
OK, So yeah, there's, you know, whether you're doing a 5 by 5 or whatever, this is going to be what
you're adding in.
Now, some of these exercises, you guys won't know.
Some of them don't even have very intuitive names, but I will just do my best to explain what they
entail.
Now, first up, we do have one that you will know is a donkey race.
So this I would say this is probably popularized by Arnold and I don't know, Arnold maybe got it off
the edge.
And this usually involved people sitting on your back and you leaning forwards, holding on to some
kind of handle, Apprider's bar, whatever, and doing essentially a like a straight leg car phrase
just in them sort of bent over standing position.
Now, Reg did suggest doing one with your toes pointed out, one set with your toes pointing forwards
and then one set with your toes pointing in.
And this was fairly common advice.
This is generally in the silver era how this exercise was being performed.
Now, we did suggest 15 to 25 repetitions.
Again, you were generally using human body weight for this exercise.
You had one to two people on your back, so that maybe influence this.
And he suggested holding the last repetition in the top position, so doing an isometric hold or
pause in the top part of that final repetition.
Then we moved into a seated calf phrase and again, one set with toes pointed out, one set with toes
pointing forwards and one set with toes pointing in and similar repetitions, 15 up to about 30.
And here he actually said hold each repetition for the pause in the top position, not just the final
one.
So interesting.
There's a bit of a distinction here.
Now the next exercise, this was 1, I believe was popularized by Alan Stephen, who we've talked about
a couple of times, and I've never seen anyone do this in the gym.
It might be a funny one to bring back.
Basically, I think they called it heel and toe walk.
Maybe there's some other names for it as well, but essentially you would load up a barbell with your
knees locked out.
You would walk up and down the gym floor like walking, stepping onto your heel and raising up onto
your toe without bending your knees.
So I gave this a little bit of a go without a barbell last night, just see what it felt like.
And I did get a bit of a cramp for my cars, but I've not tried this loaded and he did recommend 2 to
I don't know what you'd call stints of this.
Then he moved into a standing toe graze with heels elevated on a block O imagine.
So heels elevated, you've got a wooden block or something behind you and then so your weight is
through your heel and what you're doing is you're pulling your toes up.
So not a a calf exercise per SE.
Now this was unloaded.
It was, it was just body weight.
Yeah, probably not much more to say about that.
And he did recommend three sets of that and again, 15 plus repetitions.
And then we've got one which I've certainly never seen in the gym.
So this involved an iron boot.
I think we've referred to an iron boot before.
It's exactly what it sounds like you put on your foot and it's heavy and he called it foot
extensions and contractions with the, with an iron boot.
So you put it on, you would have one leg sort of crossed over your other leg, like suspended in the
air.
And essentially you're just kind of what you say, just rotating the foot essentially back and forth
with his boot on until, until you can't move it any further anymore.
So that's, yeah, that's a entertaining little exercise and we're almost done.
Then we've got a knee forward lunge position.
So you're imagine you're doing a almost like a split squat, like a front foot, elevated split squat
styles.
You're pushing quite far forwards.
And then with that front foot, you're starting in a flat position and you're just coming up on the
toes.
You're doing a calf raise just with that one foot at a time, which is an interesting creative way of
doing a single leg calf raise in, you know, limited equipment context.
And that was unloaded.
Obviously, it's, it's going to be body weight in that position.
And he just suggested basically doing as many repetitions as you can.
And then the final exercise.
And this was a little bit more optional.
And he did acknowledge that this was quite a difficult one and that some people had to persist with
it for a while to get the hang of it.
But he he was, he did assert that if he did do it, it would certainly pay off.
And he also said, look, you don't need it all the time.
Maybe you do it once a week.
You know, it's sort of a little bit more optional or, you know, frequency is not as important.
But hey, he called it a concentration toe press.
Now you can have to use your imagination here.
So you're sitting down in essentially like a seated calf raised position, but your feet are flat on
the floor, no load, nothing.
And without elevating any part of your foot, you're pushing your foot through the floor almost like
you're trying to to grab the floor with your toes and you're using, he didn't have the language of
mind muscle connection, but essentially you're trying to create this mind muscle connection in this,
in this sort of movement.
And he actually, so, you know, we've talked about muscle control.
That was a thing back in the day.
Grudge actually called it, he called it mental contraction.
He said mental contraction is better than calling it muscle control.
I don't know why that is.
Perhaps he was just differentiating himself.
But it was a yeah, a mind muscle control connection, isometric type exercise.
So there's quite a lot there, quite a few unique things.
I'm interested to hear your thoughts on some of this.
Yes, quite a few things to pick out really.
So starting with a macro view, kind of looking at everything that's there.
It's interesting that we've got both straight leg exercises and also the bent knee exercises because
as we know from the data that's been collected since that point, tend to get a lot more gastroc
involvement in the straight leg car phrase exercises and you get a lot more soleus in the in the
seated versions.
I think here just kind of looking through them, I think the donkey rays is going to be straight leg.
These obviously seated is going to be bent leg.
The heel and toe walk is going to be straight leg.
A standing toe rays is I think a dorsiflexion exercise really rather than plantar flexion.
Foot extensions and contractions, I think is both plantar flexion and dorsiflexion depending on the
angle of the foot or whatever.
However that's done, the knee forward lunge position is really interesting because I think from
memory, from the picture that you showed me before we jumped on this podcast to do this, I think
that basically puts it in a very similar position to the seated car phrase.
Yeah.
But as you say it's a single leg variation and potentially that allows a little bit more loading
because you know we are seeing very high reps here and that is almost certainly because of the
limitations of the equipment that's available.
I mean using barbells and whatever load or boots they can kind of conjure up.
So you know it's an interesting sort of way of just increasing the increasing the load in that in
that particular exercise.
So macro view, you know, I'm seeing both straight leg and bent bag car phrase exercises, which is
exactly what we would start.
Second level down.
I'm seeing again, exercises targeting both lateral and medial gastroc by pointing the feet in
different directions.
So again, that's something that we would look at if we were looking for maximal, you know, kind of
cough development.
So, you know, two of the things that I would have on my list because of the Physiology and bio
mechanics data that we've got access to were already on their list.
Now there are things that are on my list that are not here, but you know, that's, you know,
potentially something we can talk about later on today.
You know, straight away, I think that's I think that's starting out really strong as a of
specialization routine, not having access to the information that we've already that we've since
collected.
So I think I think that's we need to start by recognizing just how good it is.
No, despite the limitations of equipment by the inability to have access to the data that we've got.
So, you know, straight away, I think it's really, really nice to see just how well as they managed
to construct this kind of program without having access to that information.
In terms of the slightly more strange bits and pieces, really, I think it's interesting that they're
looking at training antagonist muscles as well.
And I think that's, that's a really interesting point.
And I think that's one of those things that I would love to have more data on.
You know, I mean, is there a point at which you start to run into difficulty if you continually
train a muscle on one side of a joint, you don't do anything for the antagonist.
I just don't know the answer to that question.
I mean, of course there's going to be people with strong opinions about that, but genuinely don't
know the answer to that question.
And then the final thing obviously is then this idea of, you know, is it to mind muscle connection?
Is it something else that he's doing, you know, trying to create some kind of benefit by doing this,
this ritual or this routine or this practice that he's got, you know, once a week or whatever that
he's doing by trying to, you know, kind of connect mentally with his calf muscles.
And I don't know what he's doing there.
I mean, as you know, we talked a little bit about this before we started today.
You know, I don't know whether that's a mind muscle connection, whether it's he's trying to do
something else, whether he's practicing, whether he's mentally doing the contraction in his mind.
And that's having some kind of practice effect because we do see that data available.
There's some interesting effects of that, but I can't see how it would particularly assist a
hypertrophy process.
Yeah, in internal to.
Comment on that one.
So Piri Radar, who we've talked about before, Piri has a car specialized specialization course as
well.
Maybe we'll talk about that in the future.
But he's a little bit more abbreviated and he doesn't do this concentration exercise.
He instead recommends posing.
And I wonder if in his mind, it's like if they're both trying to achieve the same outcome with that.
Yeah.
I mean, I think that's, that's a really interesting point.
You know, I mean if it is a internal focus retention idea, then it could be that they're using it as
a strategy to try and increase Mote unit recruitment because it does tend to increase mote unit
recruitment and the calves do have a voluntary activation deficit.
So that is a an interesting possibility because obviously the more access we've got to high
threshold mote units, the more capacity we've got for hypertrophy.
I think it's a very plausible idea.
I just from the description, it's not obvious that that is in fact what he's doing.
So and also there are a number of other ways to increase motor unit recruitment.
You don't need to use a internal focus of attention.
You can do it through other methods as well.
So again, that becomes a little bit more vague and I don't want to hijack today by going down that
route because I've got other things that I'd prefer to focus on.
So, but yeah, no, I mean, just going back to my initial comments, I really like what they've done
here, what he's done here, did here.
I think, you know, it's always, you know, both gratifying and surprising at the same time to see how
these guys were producing routines that are very, very similar to what we would produce today based
on an entirely different collection of information.
Yeah, the Dolter Grays, I don't think I showed you that.
I'll just quickly mention he didn't call that a donkey raise by the way.
He called it a toe raise with a partner.
It later became those of known as a donkey raise.
The photos the same in the image where he describes how to do it, he does in fact have someone
sitting on his back.
Like that is how you would do this.
And I actually did this exercise only a couple of days ago.
One of the gyms I frequent has a donkey raise machine and I think I had 160 ish kilos on there,
maybe a little bit more.
And I was still doing relatively high repetitions with it.
And you just can't really get much more on the machine.
So, you know, I often see these kind of recommendations and I think, well, of course you have to do
20 repetitions.
Of course, you know, if you, how many people you know, you're going to have a village of people in
your back.
Like you just can't do this.
And imagine running a course like this and telling people do 5 to 10 repetitions on this exercise.
Like you would have no confidence that that person's going to go get 4 mates to go sit in the back.
They're not.
They're going to have one person there, one training partner, and they'll do 5 repetitions with one
training partner when they could be doing 20.
So I think, I don't know if that's what their thought pattern was, but surely that necessity
informed some of these repetitions that they were using.
Yeah.
I mean, that makes perfect sense, I think.
And, you know, maybe that's one of the reasons why gradually over time, people came to believe that
calf training, you know, required these high repetitions.
I mean, that kind of that kind of sequence of events is repeated throughout human history.
I mean, somebody starts doing something for practical reason, and then a couple of generations later
and everyone's like, well, if you don't do it like that, it won't work.
It's like, well, they started doing it like that for these practical reasons.
It had nothing to do with the fact that it doesn't work in any other way.
And I think that could be a really, really interesting explanation for why we see that tendency for
people to keep doing high Rep calf work today.
I did have a question for you.
I don't know if you have any thoughts on this.
And the first exercises, the donkey ray, so the stiff leg he was, he didn't do an isometric hold in
each of the repetitions, but then in the seated calf raise, he did one for each repetition in the
top position.
Do you have any thoughts on that?
Yeah, that's, I mean, that's a really interesting point and actually segues into the the topic that
I'd like to talk about today.
So let's let's just kind of work through what's going on here.
So if we look at the seated car phrase, the purpose of training the seated car phrase is to train
the soleus and the soleus has best leverage in the contract position.
So essentially if you're doing a pause at the top of every single Rep in your seated car phrase,
which is as programmed, then what you're doing is you're spending more time in the exact zone where
the soleus has leverage, which is the muscle you're training.
So it actually makes a lot of sense to do that.
You basically spend your time in the zone where the muscle that you're training has the best
leverage.
Now, if we look in contrast at the purpose of a straight leg car phrase, like a donkey kind of car
phrase, that situation is different because we're trying to train the gastroc and the gastroc has
the best leverage in the stretch position.
We don't want to be spending most of our time in the contractor position.
That's counterproductive to the purpose of the exercise.
And that again, fits perfectly with what we're, what we're seeing here.
They're only doing that pause at the very, very end of the set.
Why would they do a pause at the very end of the set?
Well, for the same reasons that we've been talking about the high repetition work.
It's because basically just given the fact that the car phrase has a resistance profile, which makes
it hardest at the top, you're going to fail at the top.
You're going to fail at the top because that's where the exercise is hardest.
So if you are doing your pause at the top, that's telling you kind of when you've failed the
exercise because ultimately you, you, I mean, if you did pauses in other positions, you wouldn't be
really getting anyway wouldn't do do anything.
So it, it kind of like, I think really what they're doing there is they're doing, maybe they're
using a 30 Rep Max, but they're doing 25 reps or you know, there or thereabouts.
And they're kind of doing that pause at the very, very end of their 25 reps And it just kind of
brings them over to the 30th Rep because they're kind of in that zone where it's failing.
And I think really for me, when I look at the two descriptions and I understand the resistance
profiles of the 2X sizes and the leverages, what I'm seeing in the case of the seat recovery is and
the pauses there, that pause is designed to target the muscle because that's weather resistance
profile and the leverage of the muscle coincide.
In contrast, when I look at the gastroid, I'm not seeing a pause for the purpose of actually
achieving anything, you know, kind of biomechanical that just literally looks practical to me.
It looks like that exercise is is going to fail at the top, You're going to do the pause at the top
and you make sure that you do actually fail on that exercise.
You know, despite the fact that you could do a zillion repetitions with it, you know, if you
weren't, you know, kind of, as you say, having a whole village sitting on your back.
So I think we're looking at 2 totally different situations there, one much more practical than the
other.
Yeah, yeah.
It's very interesting how it's making making the best out of a very limited situation.
Absolutely, Which is, you know, something we probably don't talk about enough.
I mean, we do mention the limitations of equipment, but at the end of the day, and these guys are
literally just trying to make a bodybuilding routine out of a few barbells, the old dumbbell here
and there and some bizarre bits of kit that they've cobbled together.
I mean, I think it's remarkable, remarkable what they've achieved, really.
So let's keep on talking about pauses.
You've mentioned some interesting stuff there, the solius and gas shock.
Let's keep going.
Cool.
So what I'd like to do today is just give people a complete picture of what's happening with pauses
and how to apply that kind of knowledge to any given strength training exercise that they they might
be interested in using a pause in.
So I'm going to just do a very quick intro to the to the things that you need to be aware of and
then we'll walk through a couple of examples and just talk about it.
Now when we talk about the examples, what you'll find is that it does get messy in places because of
the interactions between what their muscle leverages are doing and what the kind of resistance
profile of the exercises are doing and where you want to put the pauses.
So we have to start out and try and get as much clarity as we can over the nuts and bolts of the
situation before we then start implementing the pauses in the exercises that we're interested in.
So starting at the beginning, if you're considering pauses, you've basically got to begin with,
before you even apply it to an X size, you've got to consider that you've got 2 variables that you
can alter.
You can change the level of effort that you're using for the pause.
And secondly, you can change the position of that pause within the repetition.
So when I talk about changing the effort level, generally speaking, in most strength training
contexts, the effort level is going to be slightly less than it would be for your normal dynamic
repetition.
Because if you've got an isometric contraction, you're going to find that you're basically capable
of producing a high level of muscle fibre force per fibre.
Then you would be, if you're dynamically contracting, so you're doing a concentric, you're going to
find that you produce less force than you do for an isometric for the same fibre.
So you're going to find that your effort levels are a little bit lower, your recruitment levels are
a little bit lower.
In certain situations, you can actually do a maximum effort pause.
For example, if you get the end of a chest press and you've got a machine that helps you lock that
out, you can just push into that and arrange position.
If you've got other people that can kind of, you know, slap a couple of extra plates on the machine
where you're in other, you know, kind of the bottom position, for example, you could do the same
thing there.
So like you can change the effort level, but just repeating myself, most of the time people are
going to be doing a slightly lower level of effort than they would do in their normal dynamic
repetition.
But yes, you can change the effort level.
You can do what is basically a isometric injection in the middle of your strength training set if
that's something that you're interested in doing.
It just requires certain exercise context for that to be possible.
And then the other variable I mentioned is the position that you're doing the pause in.
So you can basically, I mean, obviously do the pause anywhere you like, but generally speaking, we
can kind of say you've got top, middle and bottom positions.
So at the top, obviously you've got the top of the sort of end of the concentric phase.
You can do a pause there.
That's what we might call a contract position.
Midrange, depending on the muscle, could be kind of contracted or it could be sort of a little bit
stretched.
But generally it could be more contract than the stretch.
And then the stretch position obviously is at the bottom of the eccentric phase.
What's going to be different here?
Primarily you've got fatigue differences.
So if you're pausing in contracts or mid range positions, you're generally going to get mostly more
metabolite related fatigue in comparison with calcium I related fatigue.
In contrast, if you're pausing in the stretch position, you can obviously get a lot more calcium I
related fatigue and a lot less metabolite related fatigue.
So that's going to change things a little bit.
Obviously we've talked a lot in the past about how metabolite related fatigue is very benign in
strength training context.
It doesn't really do anything apart from, you know, kind of move you closer towards the end of your
set.
In contrast, calcium related, if you start creating a lot of that, you're going to find that you
don't actually get the stimulus you're expecting.
So this is just a really, really important point that people trip up on a lot.
They come to the stimulating rest model and they think I'll just create fatigue and more fatigue and
I'll get more stimulating reps And so I will you have to look at the types of fatigue you're
generating.
You know, if you start generating a lot of calcium, I'm relating fatigue, you're probably going to
start losing stimulating reps in comparison with what you would get if you were not generating that
large amount of calcium.
I'm related fatigue.
But obviously context and magnitude and all of that are going to play a role in situations.
Just kind of starting points.
Two things to remember.
You got the intensity or level of effort that you're applying in your pause.
You know, is it an isometric where you're pushing really hard or is it it just kind of a hold where
you're slightly lower level of effort than you were being in on normal dynamic contraction?
That's the most normal situation.
And secondly, you know, what position in the range of motion the exercise and you've got fatigue to
consider straight to where when you're thinking about that.
And that's going to apply in every single situation no matter what you're talking about.
But you know, obviously we can now go on and talk more specifically about specific exercises and
muscle groups, things like that.
But is all of that making sense so far?
Yeah, it is.
The fatigue point I think is very important because you could have something on paper that looks
effectively the same.
So you could have, like you said, you could have a pause in the contractor position, pause and
lengthen position.
Now someone like for example, the Rich Park routine just talked about that pause in that top
position in the contractor position, the fatigue from that, that will dissipate potentially what
very quickly the next set.
Whereas if you did a pause in a lengthened position, the fatigue from that may take what, a day?
You're carrying it with you really once you've created it, yes, so.
This is interesting that on paper you could just say this exercise with pause, but the implication
of kind of fatigue that it causes it could be vastly different.
Exactly.
Exactly.
And so it's always worth just ticking those two boxes off and understanding, you know, what is it
that we're doing because the intensity obviously is then going to impact on the impact on the effect
of the position.
So if you have any high, high effort isometric in the contractor position, you know, you magnifying
the amount of metabolite related to fatigue, OK, no problem.
If you now do a high effort contraction in the stretch position, you've got problems because you've
just flooded all of your fast rich muscle fibers with calcium ions and you're going to end up with a
totally, you know, kind of limited ability then to create mechanical tension in those muscle fibers
in the next, you know, repetitions even, let alone the next set.
So your effort level is going to magnify the impact of your, you know, kind of position in the range
of motion that you're doing, your pause in.
So not only have we got to think about the intensity level and what that's doing and the position
and what that's doing, but also the impact of the intensity on the position.
You've got these, you know, kind of this interaction effect of the two things.
So just like as a background, before we even start talking about what happens when you've got an
exercise and a muscle that you're interested in training moving onwards, the next thing to do is
then to say, well, OK, we've got an exercise that we're interested in.
We've got a muscle that we're interested in training.
How do we now start to apply pauses in the context of training that muscle in this exercise or with
this exercise?
And that's basically where we need to do 2 things.
We need to look at the the leverages of the muscle and we need to look at the resistance profile of
the exercise.
So the leverage of the muscle will tell us where we want to train it.
So if the muscle has great leverage in the contract position like the soleus does, you know, then it
kind of tells us that if we're going to do a pause for the purpose of training the soleus, it kind
of has to be in the contractor position.
There's not any point in doing a pause in the stretch position because that isn't going to train the
soleus.
Firstly, if you're looking at training the gastrop, you've got the opposite issue.
If you, you know, or the opposite end of the range of motion.
It's like you wouldn't do a, you wouldn't do a pause in the contract position to train the gastrop,
which is my point about the routine that Reg was doing.
You know, he didn't have pause after every Rep in his straight leg calf razors because it doesn't do
anything for the muscle that he's actually trying to train.
I think it's a really interesting observation.
So again, we would do the pause in the stretch position if we were wanting to use pauses for
training the gastrop.
So straightaway what we're looking at is a kind of one piece of information, which is that the
leverage of the muscle is telling us where we could do the pause.
Makes sense?
Yeah, absolutely.
Secondly, we now have to superimpose the resistance profile of the exercise because if you have a
resistance profile of the exercise that is very easy at one end, they're very hard at the other,
then doing a pause at the hard end is kind of what you want to do because you're getting that high
level of effort.
Because remember what I said about isometrics involving slightly lower levels of effort for the same
amount of muscle fiber force, sorry, muscle force.
And because muscle fiber forces are higher, so you get more muscle fiber force with an isometric.
So you actually lose a little bit of recruitment.
So you want to be doing your pause where the exercise is most difficult.
There's not a lot point in doing a pause.
I mean, basically you're having a rest really, which is fine.
I mean, you do clusters if you want, you know, intercept rest periods, that's totally fine.
But that's not what we're talking about.
We're talking about the purpose of a pause for the purpose of, you know, you know, training
stimulus.
I want to make a point on that, which I know is not the point you were making, but when I do program
classes, I'm very careful about using exercises where somebody's not going to intuitively rest for
the cluster in a stretch position.
If you were to do like, you know, you can test this out.
If you do a leg curl, do a seated leg curl, do a cluster, keep your legs on the pad in a stretch
position.
It's like a passive stretch.
You're not even actively doing anything and you're shake in that class is going to tank compared to
doing in a line like or something We can change position.
So I just wanted to put that out there.
Totally.
And I think there's a difference between what we're describing here as pauses and of clusters.
I mean, technically we really in a cluster should be aiming to, you know, remove any kind of
fatiguing influence whatsoever, even if that is a small amount of activation in the stretch position
that you described.
You know, the purpose of a cluster is to get rid of that fatigue so that we can carry on applying
more stimulus in the absence of a fatigued state.
So here what we're saying then is that, you know, if you're trying to train a, a muscle that you've
identified as having a their leverage, that means that it's got a solid amount of capacity to
contribute to an exercise in a either a contract position or a stretch position.
You need to now look at your resistance profile, the exercise that you are using and identify
whether it matches that.
So if you're looking at your car phrase and you say do car phrases in general have a resistance
profile which is hardest at the top?
Yes, they do.
So in fact, whenever you're training solius, you've already got everything you need to do contract
to position pauses because the exercise is naturally most difficult to the top.
The solius has best leverage at the top.
You can do a pause.
And basically what you're doing now is essentially similar to a limited range of motion partial.
You're spending more time operating in the zone where that muscle has best leverage.
You are targeting that muscle effectively.
So a partial range of motion, like a contracted partial for the soleus in a seated carvery, which is
kind of what a seated car phrase is most of the time anyway.
But you know, or a pause in the contracted position, they're all doing the kind of the same thing.
What they're doing is they're forcing you to spend more time focusing your set, the stimulus of your
set, on one very specific part of the muscle.
That's all it's doing.
A contract position, partial, that's all it's doing is causing you to spend more time around the
area you're not.
You're not getting extra stimulus compared to a normal strength training set because the fatigue
will progress at the same kind of rate.
You're just spending more kind of time in the place that is targeting the precise area of muscle
that you're interested in training.
Does that make sense?
Yeah, it's, I mean, I don't want to take you down a different path, but it's the same mentality when
people using a common and resistance or reverse banding something or whatever.
Like you're essentially what you're doing is like what you've explained that you're spending more
time in that particular portion of that repetition or where that muscle is best leverage or
whatever.
All we're doing is just manipulating some variable.
For how much of that set are you spending where that muscle is best leverage?
Exactly where you know, where are you applying your high levels of effort essentially in this or
even any level of effort to be honest.
Because if you come out of that range of motion and you start coming down into a more stretched
position, you're now starting to create fatigue mechanisms which have nothing to do with the actual
target muscle that you are training with that exercise.
Essentially all we're really doing is is more specific targeted exercise around the muscular instant
training.
Now the opposite case is really, really illustrative because any car phrase has a sort of sticking
point or the most difficult part of the exercise at the top.
It's just how they are because the entire, you know, kind of plantar flex complex works in that way.
You know, all of the overall leverage gives you your strongest kind of the greatest torque in the
top position.
So if you now start doing pauses in a stretch position because you're like, Oh well, the gas truck
has stretched position, position, best leverage in stretch position.
Great.
Yeah.
But does the exercise actually have a sticking point in the stretch position?
No, it doesn't.
So what you're going to find is that you do stretch position pauses in a car phrase exercise for the
gastroc.
It's not actually going to do what you think it's going to do because your effort levels are going
to be really low.
You're not going to get into that top level of MOTI equipment that you want in order to produce the
maximum amounts of muscle growth for that particular muscle.
And that's really why in the case of a stretched position partial for the gastroc, if you're doing a
calf phrase where you limit the range of motion, it changes everything.
Because as soon as you do a lengthened sort of partial, you're going to find that you can actually
use a lot more weight because, you know, essentially previously you were failing in that top range
of motion because the plantar flexors have got, you know, horrendously bad leverage in that top part
of the range of motion, amazing leverage in the lower part as a group.
So essentially, they're really, really weak in that top half.
And so you use a lot less weight as soon as you do a length and partial using a lot more weight and
you get A and, and if you wanted to, you could actually start doing pauses then as well.
But essentially that the length and partial allows you to spend that range of motion doing the
targeting of the gas truck in that situation.
Does that make sense?
Yeah.
I mean, it's the same thing you see in studies where they do the the calf raise, they do go to
failure doing the full run standing calf raise and then they finish with length and partials and
they get how many more repetitions they are because like you've just identified, they're the hardest
bit is in fact the top part of that exercise.
Exactly, exactly.
So if you want to use pauses in the case of you know a calf raise for the gastroc and you're doing a
stretch position pause for the gastroc because the gastroc has best leverage in the stretch
position.
What you're going to find is that your effort levels are really low and you don't get into the high
threshold motor unit pool and you don't actually end up training the muscle very effectively, just
creating a bunch of calcium.
I'm relative T that isn't helping you particularly.
So much better is to use a limited range of motion start and just go up to the halfway point.
You'll find that you can massively increase how much load you're using and as a result you then
start to train the muscle and target the muscle in a very effective way.
So if you wanted to do pauses in the stretch position with a full range of motion car phrase
exercise, you would need the opposite resistance profile from the one you've got.
Which you could, I mean, there's no way you could standardize this, but if you had a training
partner, you're doing a toe press and a leg press, something like that, you could have the training
partner actually applying by pushing into the back of the seat in that bottom position, making it
more challenging when in the bottom.
Or if you're doing a standing calf race, you could have some actually pull down on.
It absolutely.
I mean the this, yeah, as you say, the standardization is the issue, but fundamentally the pause
isn't going to do what people think it's going to do in comparison with, say length and partial, you
know, the length of pause will use a lot more weight.
You can actually kind of start to mimic what the effect you would get with a genuine pause in a
contractor position for the soleus in a seated car phrase because that's the sticking point of the
exercise.
But I think once you've got the basics down of understanding where you are with things like pauses
and effort levels and fatigue, when you actually come to apply it to an individual exercise, you've
actually got to look at the exercise and go, does my leverage match my resistance profile for doing
the pause?
Because if I'm doing a pause in a completely irrelevant part of the range of motion, it's not doing
anything.
Well, it's not that it's not doing anything, it's probably not doing anything good.
You know, if it's, if you're, if you're doing a pause in a contractor position, like for example,
pick a leg press, you do pauses in the contract position of the leg press, you know, generally
speaking that you're going to create minimal amounts of extra fatigue.
And in fact, it's probably going to feel like a rest.
So you know, OK, let's let's say mid range just to be kind of like fair and create a bit of extra
metabolar A fatigue.
What's that really doing?
Just doing absolutely nothing has a neutral effect.
It's just going to bring you to failure more quickly.
And metabolar a fatigue is, is completely benign for that purpose.
So it's just bringing you to failure more quickly.
In the case of a stretch position pause where you don't need it or where you can't benefit from it,
then that's slightly, slightly less innocuous because say for example, you're doing these kind of
pauses in a, in a calf phrase, a straight leg calf phrase, because you're thinking that's going to
work for the gastroc.
You're going to get a little bit more calcium amylate fatigue, but you're not really going to get a
lot of high effort contraction in that scenario.
And it's not then going to bring you, you know, the benefits of stretch mediate hypertrophy or even
just normal hypertrophy to the gas drop because levels of activation aren't that high.
But if you do enough of it and you keep doing it, maybe you get really long pauses, you might start
to interfere with your ability to get stimulating repetitions because calcium i'molative fatigue
does reduce the amount of mechanical tension that muscle fibres can generate.
Is that effect going to be really big?
Probably not because the cover is itself tend to be relatively, you know, kind of sort of type 1,
you know, kind of in in distribution.
So you're probably not going to see an enormous effect, but it's there and it, you know, is worth
knowing.
About talking through another example people, I find this interesting.
So maybe like a leg extension I think is an interesting example because it's one where you could
feasibly do a pause both in the contractor position depending on the machine you've got.
And especially now you see people with all these, you know, additional kind of, I don't know if
you've seen these pads and stuff you can get to add on to the leg extension to be able to get a more
of a stretch position and you could theoretically do a pause and that stretch as well.
And obviously it's a quadriceps that have best leverage out that entire.
Yeah.
So leverage from the muscle point of view is, is completely, you've got free reign to do whatever
you want.
So it only comes down to what's the resistance profile of the knee extension.
So you basically limit to if you can change that with bands or if it has a setting that allows you
to move it around.
Yeah, like the prime machines.
Yeah.
So you could actually do it any way you wanted to and you would get, if you have the capacity to,
you get a little bit more stretch medium than ability by doing stretch position pause.
But obviously once you pass that, you know, kind of capacity, there's no point in doing that.
So you know, you could do pauses in the contract with a mid range positions.
What's that doing?
All it's doing is going to is going to chop some reps off.
You're set and put in a benign way, it's not going to create a problem for you.
You're going to basically just get to failure quicker, quicker, not in terms of time, but in terms
of repetitions.
So it's completely and utterly innocuous.
It's not going to do anything bad, but it's not going to do anything good either really, because
there's no reason to do it.
You know, an example that would make more sense would be to look at, well, you know, what if we
started talking about pauses in a frontal plane overhead press.
You know, in that scenario, you've now got 2 completely different muscle groups that are dominating
in different ranges of motion.
I'm.
So now if you can play around with resistance profiles, you can say, well, OK, I'm going to use a
resistance profile that's very hard in the contract position and I'm going to basically start to do
a pause in that, then that contractor position.
That's a really nice anterior adult exercise.
I'm trying to think of an example where you would do a pause in a contractor position, not for the
purpose of biasing your region.
Actually pauses in contract positions are pretty much identical.
I mean, really pauses are almost identical if you do them correctly to to partial ranges of motion.
Really.
I mean, that's, that's kind of how you can think about them.
You can just kind of go, if I do, if I do a pause in the difficult part of the range of motion or if
I just limit my range of motion to that range of motion, that's doing the same thing, the
difference.
Is that with pauses, you have to know what's happening in the rest of the range of motion.
Because if I said we're going to do a partial range of motion overhead press and I'm just going to
do the top half range of motion, I'm already completely and utterly targeting the anterior deal by
doing that.
The same if I do a lower half the range of motion, which is basically the same as the lateral raise,
I'm going to target the middle though.
I don't need to think about pauses or anything like that.
I'm automatically targeting that muscle.
If you do full range of motion, you're going to, I'm going to do a pause here to target that muscle.
You have to know whether that's the difficult part of the range of motion or not.
Or if you do a partial range of motion, you don't need to know that information.
If you're doing the partial you, you know that.
That's why you you selected a partial.
Yes, but you don't need to mess around with the resistance profile and try and fiddle it to make it
line up with the, you know what I'm saying?
Like if you wanted to, if you wanted to use a pause in a full range of motion, frontal plane
overhead press to target the metal or anterior door, you would have to fiddle the the resistance
profile to make that possible.
Yeah, if you do a partial range of motion, you don't need to fiddle.
It it's the same goal, isn't it?
Like I can't see why.
It does the same thing.
You would do it.
And so essentially, if you're doing a contracted position pause, you're doing it so in the hopes
that you make that exercise with that repetition bias one region over another where the other region
has.
Your resistance profile has to let that happen, and that's the bit that people are missing.
But then if you're doing a length of position pause, you're doing that.
Well, I guess you could theoretically be doing it for the same purpose, but you can also be doing it
for the benefit of stretch mediated hypertrophy.
But again, only if the muscle has the.
If it worked.
Has the leverage in that position.
So you've still got to go through the leverage journey first you need.
To get there, you need to make sure that it's feasible, but really they're the only to react on like
that's.
That's why you would even think about it, no?
So I think really for me, the partial range of motion is so much more practical because you don't
need to mess around with your resistance profile to make it happen.
It's so way better method for targeting a muscle than doing a pause in the range of motion that is
targeting the muscle you're interested in.
Because practically speaking, if you want to do a pause in a range of motion that targets the
muscle, you have to set the resistance profile up to do that anyway because.
It's much easier to standardize as well.
And it's much easier to standardize because otherwise, well, that's going to happen.
If you do a pause in the range of motion that you, that's not the sticking point, You're just
creating fatigue, which may or may not be, you know, a problem.
If it's metabolized fatigue, OK, it's not really doing very much.
If it's, you know, calcium, I'm late, then it probably is causing a bit of a problem.
So I think really there is a solid argument for stating that a partial range of motion is a much,
much, much more practically usable method of targeting a muscle that has good leverage in particular
range of motion than using pauses in that same position.
You know, and that's certainly true of something like the gastroc in a seated, sorry, in a standing
calf raise or a toe press type exercise.
So 1 Interesting application kind of point here.
So I think you mentioned if you're doing the pause in a contractor position, then you're getting to
failure earlier in terms of the amount of repetitions because you're getting more of this metabolite
build up.
And now you've just said, well, really for all intents and purposes, A partial exercise is probably
going to be arguably superior to a pause in the contractor position.
Now with the partial, you're, you've got the opposite trouble.
If the load were the same, you're going to be getting arguably more repetitions than you would be.
So say you're doing an overhead press and you're just doing a top partial, you're going to get more
repetitions.
And if you're doing the same way, you're doing full grown, right?
Even if even like depending on where that seeking point is for that individual, even if the seeking
point is in the top position, you're still like, it's still, you're never going to get less
repetitions no matter what.
You're not going to get less by doing that partial, right?
And so for me, when I'm program, you say, say I'm traveling and I've got access to limited equipment
or I don't have a Jim pin or whatever in the machine.
So go very heavy or whatever it is.
That's basically the only time I'll use some of these kind of methods just to essentially get more
metabolite fatigue.
And I used to use the pause, but I don't like the pause.
Like I find, you know, it is hard to kind of standardize when you like the way it feels etcetera.
So what I do instead is, and the partial won't work because it's going to require more load.
So I actually do like a 1 1/4.
So I'm doing just that length of partial between each repetition in that contracted position, kind
of.
Contracted partial.
Contracted partial.
So that is also allowing me to do fewer repetitions, less time in a stretch position, less damage.
It's kind of me.
It's I wouldn't, I wouldn't program it.
It's hard to standardize, but if I'm traveling, it's the best hybrid between doing this pause and
doing purely A partial.
Does that make sense?
Yeah.
No, no, I see.
I see what you're saying and what what you're really doing there is you're kind of going, you're an
extra step and you're saying that, you know you wouldn't even use the pauses for the thing that
people use the pauses for.
Yeah, exactly.
Yeah, The one benefit it has, I think you could.
I'm kind of arguing that partials are better than pauses and you're kind of going, well, you know,
even if you want to use a pause, it's still better to use a partial, which actually makes sense
because partials will concentrics are less efficient than isometrics.
So if you're wanting to do the pause for the purpose of or contract deposition, pause for the
purposes of just creating more metabolize relativity, getting yourself to failure quicker, a kind of
partial is actually better at doing that.
Yeah, interesting.
So to get on the other end the length and pauses, what else do we need to say about those?
So I mean, really I think people are focused on lengthened position pauses because of the stretch
mediate hypertrophy kind of point of view, you know, and that's, that's fine.
I mean, the point I'm making is that the pause is going to give you a lower level of emotion
recruitment than a dynamic kind of range of motion.
Although obviously, you know, if we're talking about stretch media hypertrophy, then we're obviously
talking about the eccentric phase anyway.
And it's like, well, how much benefit you're really going to get, you know, from that recruitment
levels are going to be low.
You know, there's there's there's a relatively challenging kind of environment to work in.
But ostensibly really, we've got the disadvantage of calcium, I related fatigue and the potential
for, you know, a little bit more sarcomere genesis stretch mediated typoscopy.
But again, you know, what it comes down to is how high up the motonic recruitment pool are you going
to be when you do that pause.
And that is coming back to the resistance profile.
And it's like you need to play the bottom position of a squat, the bottom position of a leg press
absolutely fine that if you want to start talking about doing stretch position pauses there or you
know, kind of lengthen partials in those contexts or with knee extensions where the hardest part of
the exercises at the bottom fine, all those situations, you've potentially got the ability to create
a bit more stretch mediator poetry.
I think there is even a study that Brad did showing that.
So, you know, I think there's that that stacks up for me.
That's exactly what we would expect to see.
But again, I would argue that, you know, is there really I'm just thinking aloud as I'm working
through that.
How would, how would that work?
Because would my length and partial be better or worse than my pause in the stretch position?
Possibly the pause in the stretch position might be, I don't know.
I actually don't know.
That's a really interesting point.
Would it be better or worse if you have a resistance profile where it's hardest in the stretch
position, the pause is actually all the way in that stretch position.
I think that would come down to an argument about what you thought Titan was really doing and how it
was working.
I think that would get physiologically really quite contentious, because what it comes down to is if
you look at the standard model that we tend to use for the way Titan behaves, we tend to model Titan
as producing passive forces in an eccentric contraction, not so much in an isometric.
So it'd be like you're getting them in the eccentric and then you you can hold that in your
isometric position and then you would obviously return and then you come back down again.
The residual force announcement effect suggests that you would get a bigger effect the longer that
you did your range of motion.
So there's a couple of factors here.
And this could get really, really messy really quickly or not so much messy as really detailed
really quickly because you could argue that a larger range of motion of your eccentric and then
holding that pause in the stretch position was actually superior to a length and partial.
But that doesn't seem to be what the data show.
So I think where we would end up is arguing or at least trying to investigate what we think Titan
really is doing and mechanically in those eccentric situations, followed by isometrics, which is the
residual force enhancement effect.
And they're saying, you know, how do these compare in terms of providing that passive mechanical
tension stimulus for sarcoma Genesis?
As you can probably tell, I haven't worked through that in my head before, so I'm trying to decide
what I think would happen.
But yeah, I mean, ultimately both lengths and lengths and partials and stretch position pauses in
the context of something like a leg press or squat, where the, you know, the muscles you're
interested in have the leverage in the stretch position and also where the exercise is hardest in
that stretch position.
I think they're all going to be much of A muchness.
They're all going to work for the purposes of producing that, that that extra muscle growth.
And actually they'll, they'll kind of also target anything that's working in that range of motion
anyway.
I mean in the context of the squads bit relevant or sorry, not squad specifically, but the
quadriceps bit relevant.
You know, if you were targeting a muscle in the stretch position it would work that way.
So if someone is doing a pause in the length and position for the purpose of achieving stretch
mediated hypertrophy, well obviously that's a short term adaption, right?
Like that's going to.
Yeah, they're going to get a couple of months worth of that and then they're not going to benefit
from it much further.
Realistically, You know, you kind of looking at stuff like muscles that have got, you know, great
leverage or break relative leverage in stretch positions if you want to start to do that.
So, you know, you're kind of thinking like biceps brachy, you're thinking like gastroc, you think.
But again, what I'm saying is you've got to look exercises that allow you to do that, you know,
which is you're then fiddling around with your resistance profile to make it happen much easier just
to do the partial range of motion.
Now, I think you've touched on a little bit, but maybe not extensively.
So the difference between doing that pause in repetition with load and doing a pause or the static
stretch without load passive stretching?
What's the difference with those?
So basically this comes back to what we were talking about with clusters.
So if you're doing a pause and you're completely relaxed because there's no load present, either
machine bottoms out or you know, it's, you know, there's nothing you need to do to to keep the
weight in place, then you know, obviously that changes what you're doing.
The there's a couple of things that are worth mentioning here.
So firstly, you have to be clear what it is that you're describing.
So what I mean by that is if you're doing a pause and you're saying I am doing a pause in the
stretch position and I'm holding, you know load here and I'm actively maintaining the position of
the weight, then that's a stretch position.
Isometric contraction relatively probably relatively low intensity unless the exercise is really
difficult in that position.
That's, but that's, that's kind of what you're doing.
So in that situation, you've got an activated muscle.
That's not a passive static stretch, that's a stretch position, isometric contraction.
Now, an interesting thing to notice about isometric contractions and stretch positions is you're not
going to get to the same range of motion that you would do if you had a deactivated muscle or
passive static stretch.
Some really nice data on this.
And we were just talking about a study before we came on this podcast to do this call because
there's, there's data showing that for every kind of, I think it's 1% increase in joint torque as a
result of muscle activation happening in a stretch position, you lose a couple of degrees to 2 1/2°
of range of motion.
As soon as you start activating the muscle in the stretch position, you aren't going to get to the
same degree of range of motions you would do as if you're completely relaxed.
So straight away, when you're talking about stretch positions and pauses and things like that, we
need to be 100% clear what the construction is that's being given.
Are we saying that we're doing like a, you know, intraset kind of static stretch?
So it's like a cluster set.
We're pausing, we're relaxing, and we're doing that at the end of each of the repetitions.
If that's the case, I mean, that's a really kind of different interesting training method and we can
analyze it, but that's not the same thing as doing a pause in the stretch position.
Does that make sense?
So the pause in the stretch position will not get you to the same range of motion as doing the
relaxed static stretch between repetitions.
That's these are completely different animals, so you're not going to get serious improvements in
range of motion as a result of increases in strict tolerance because you're not getting to Max
ranges of motions so.
It's just for people to be clear.
So if you were to do a full, relaxed stretch between repetitions, what what's an exercise where that
might be feasible?
Well, if you're, if you're kind of doing your calf raises in that leg press scenario, then often, I
mean I've got hyper mobile ankles, so I can bottom out that position really easily.
I can get to a sort of silly stretch position and the machine bottoms out essentially.
So I could now passively static stretch, completely deactivate the muscle.
I could go all the way down into a super stretch position, so you could do that if you wanted to do
that.
If you're, I think you'd be able to adjust the leg press regardless and you should be able to,
everyone should be able to do that.
Yeah.
So you there's no you're not feeling any load from the Legress on in that pause position.
Well, you're, you're completely relaxing and you're not trying to, you know, kind of come back up
again essentially.
So you're, you're totally and utterly relaxing and there's no, there's no kind of impact of, of the,
of the extra bit.
You're not kind of holding a stretch position.
So however you, you know, what kind of think about the important thing is, is there activation or
not?
I mean, technically you could have somebody pushing you into that stretch position.
I mean, there's all kinds of ways you can think about it.
I mean, like those car studies with those boots, I mean, effectively, yeah.
That's like somebody pushing you into that position.
The question is, is the muscle activated or not?
You know, whether you get there from somebody pushing you or you're pushing yourself or there's a
load, all of these things are other.
I mean, sometimes, I mean, historically people got much more agitated about this when I said to
them, you know, the concept of loaded stretch is meaningless.
Every stretch is loaded because that's how you get the stretch.
You have to put yourself in the position.
Now you're either pushing yourself, you've got somebody else pushing you, or you've got to wait
someone, doesn't matter.
It's like, is the muscle activated or not?
Because if the muscle is activated, then it's the stretch position, isometric.
And if your muscle is not activated, then it's a passive static stretch.
It does.
The word loaded is meaningless.
It really is.
People get really, really wound up about it, but it literally just tells you, you know, some minor
details about the method that you're using to get into the position of the stretch.
So let's keep workshopping this idea of this example.
So you're in it, you're doing a toe press, you've bottomed down to the bottom.
There's you've, you're not active in, there's no resistance I guess being applied and then you do
another repetition and you do that little pause between each of these repetitions.
What's happening in that scenario?
So, So what we're saying then is that there's a difference between holding an activated muscle in a
stretch position and holding a relaxed muscle in a stretch position.
The activated muscle doesn't get to the same range of motion, but it's going to be creating a lot
more calcium.
I'm related fatigue.
The stretch position.
You're going to be able to basically create a passive static stretch stimulus in the middle of your
strength training set, which is a really interesting kind of idea.
Does it benefit us in any way, or would we be better off just doing it afterward?
Because I put it down, how could it possibly benefit?
How could it be better than doing it afterwards?
Because ultimately doing it afterwards, if you do a static, if you do a static stretch after a
strength training workout, there is no interference of your strength training workout fatigue
mechanisms on that static stretch stimulus because you don't need any active tension production.
You don't.
You could have all the excitation contraction coupling failure in the world going on and it doesn't
change your passive tension stimulus because passive tension stimulus is coming without any muscle
activation whatsoever.
In contrast, knee static stretch is going to produce a little bit of calcium amylated T, which is
going to interfere with the concentric repetitions that you do in the strength training set.
Alter is no down, no upside of doing it, you know, and you'd be much better off just doing the
static stretching after the end of your calf raise workout.
So just do your normal calf raise workout and then do some static stretching at the end.
You're going to get a better range of motion than you would do from a stretch position, isometric or
pause, and you're going to get a better strength training stimulus than you would do if you'd done
your static stretching in between repetitions.
Is it possible that the fatigue or the perception of effort from the strength workout will reduce
stretch tolerance if you were to then do the study stretch afterwards?
So that's that's a really interesting one.
I think really that's one of those things that's never been tested.
There is some interaction between the perception of stretch and the perception of effort, but
they're not identical.
So I think really it would be, would be an interesting one to, to kind of test, to be honest.
I mean, if anybody's kind of listening to this and they've got a, you know, they're looking at a
project for their master's degree, or maybe they've got some kind of, you know, even a, even a
bachelor's degree type a sports science experiment that they might be capable of doing in the final
year or something like that.
Then a really interesting thing to do would literally be to test range of motion before and after
strength training workouts.
So literally just do and you could do this non locally and locally.
So you could do a, you know, test range of motion in a muscle that you're about to train and you
could test range of motion in another muscle that you're not going to train.
So you could maybe do a lower body workout and you could test upper body and lower body flexibility,
do the workout and then immediately afterwards you could test upper and lower body flexibilities
again and see what happens.
You know, my gut feel is that you will probably see either no changes or a slight improvement in
range of motion rather than a slight decrease because generally speaking, size tends to have a
little bit of a analgesic effect.
Yeah.
So I would actually expect you would improve range of motion a little bit rather than making it
worse.
But potentially as you've outlined, if you're still, if you're feeling like you're suffering a
little bit after the workout and you've got that sort of super spinal CNST going on, you know, does
that then reduce how much pain we can tolerate in this context of a static stretch?
Well, as I say, nobody's ever tested that.
There are some, I mean, this is outside of the scope of today's conversation.
There are some interaction effects that I've talked about on the FAQ, but I don't think they're
absolutely identical.
We're well and truly beyond the point where people would recommend passive stretching before a
strength training workout like everyone.
Exactly.
So why would you put one in the middle of a strength training set?
Exactly.
Yeah.
You know, I mean, it's like, is it clear that it doesn't, it doesn't do any it, it probably doesn't,
you know, do anything good to do the stretch before or during, you know, and there's clear reasons
to do afterwards because there's no known interference really with it.
You know, I think it's, it's interesting, you know, it's like people are always looking for ways to
make an exercise better, you know, and what we, what we always want to do is interrogate these
things physiologically and go, what do we think is going on?
And like I was saying with the case of the stretch position, you know, kind of pause versus the
length and partial, you know, in the context of a leg press or squat, you start to analyze those,
you know, this is really interesting.
I'm not sure I can really put these together and argue one over the other, you know, and that that
that's that comes down to a lack of clarity over exactly what Titan is doing in these particular
situations.
And the models that you use will give you different answers depending on what model you you prefer.
And I think it's probably a little bit too messy to really get to the point where you where I've got
a firm answer on on that.
You know, but other situations is a lot clearer.
You can kind of go, well, clearly there's no benefit of doing that.
You might as well just do this instead.
So I think it depends on the context.
But you know, what I was really trying to do with this podcast today was just kind of introduce
people to these concepts that need to be aware of starting with, you know, what types of fatigue
they're creating, You know, what effort levels they're likely to be experiencing.
And then how the moment arm of each individual muscle in the over the joint angle range of motion
and the resistance profile that you've got with each other to create the individual effects of
pauses.
Then having understood that, compare that with what you would get from doing a partial range of
motion in the range that the muscle has the best leverage, because ultimately that is a far superior
way of approaching these kind of goals that you might have for targeting particular muscles.
By doing pauses, you actually get a much, much more pragmatic, practically usable solution by doing
a kind of either a contracted or I guess mid range as well.
But, you know, doing a post range of motion is going to be most of the time far easier to
standardize, far easier to get the effect that you want without really messing around with, you
know, elastic buns and all kinds of other things.
So it sounds like you're saying that there's probably not a scenario scenario where you would be
personally programming a pause in well in either a lengthened or contracted position.
I think I would always prefer the the partial range of motion in almost any situation.
I mean, I can see a scenario where you could argue that pauses like in a stretch position of say a
leg press or something like that.
You could argue for that.
But as I say, you would be starting to have to argue for one or other mechanisms by which Titan
might work.
You know, and when I say mechanisms by which Titan might work, I'm not like arguing against the
fundamental basics of it, which is that, you know, Titan is being stretched in the course of a
activated kind of eccentric contraction to a greater extent than it is in a passive static stretch.
Not arguing that.
I'm saying exactly, precisely what Titan is doing.
Is it winding?
What are we actually describing here?
And how does that play out in the context of an isometric kind of pause at the end of a eccentric
contraction?
No, because often you know, residual force enhancement effect tends to show greater effects when you
have larger ranges of motion leading up to your isometric.
So, you know, there's, there's some really interesting things that you can get into there and I
don't know, honesty which side of the fence that I would probably come out on and I'd have to really
spend some time thinking about it.
It's quite rare actually that I, I get presented with these kind of ideas and I look at, I genuinely
haven't thought about that.
You know, I think that's a really interesting one that's going to that's going to irritate me now.
I'm sure we'll see an FAQ on the scene.
Might be a few months.
Oh yes, I think there'll eventually be an FAQ on on what I think is happening with length and
partials versus pauses in stretch positions in situations like the leg press where you've got you
know the resistance profile is already benefiting you such that the everything is happening in that
stretch position already.
Would a full range of motion eccentric actually get you a bit more as it's your force enhancement in
your paws compared to your length and partial?
I don't know.
I'll have to really pour some data together to see what I think is going on there.
You made the point or you have made the point several times about active and relaxed stretch or the
muscle being active relaxed in the in the stretch.
And I'm confusion I see online is people justifying a pause in like in a set where their muscles are
active and using evidence from studies where they did stretches in a relaxed position and saying
This is why I'm doing that.
I think you've probably covered everything you need to there, but I just wanted to point out that
those are clearly not the same thing.
No, they're not the same thing.
And that's why I said when when we're talking about the the stretch position in something like a
seat not seated, obviously it is seated if you're doing it as a toe press, but that's not the point.
That's why my brain kind of goes, well, I'm sitting down when I'm doing this exercise, so I must
call it a seated exercise.
But it's a straight leg, a straight leg car phrase.
And you're trying to, you know, train the gastroc and like, OK, so how can we focus the exercise on
the stretch?
But interestingly enough, you know, the same people who are arguing about this stuff, you know, they
are quite happy to argue for the neuro mechanical matching interpretations when it suits them.
And neurochemical matching tells us the gas truck has best leverage in the stretch position.
So that's where we train it.
So, you know, we're training the gas truck in the stretch position, you know, do we use a pause?
Is that pause?
You know, how does it all work?
Is it like Bosch?
Whatever.
Now my solution is just use a length and partial because you'll use a lot more weight and you end up
creating a situation in which the gastroc has to do a lot of hard work in that stretch position.
Fantastic, problem solved.
As you pointed out, some people are now kind of saying, well, you know, can I not just use a pause
and do a four range of motion?
Well, no, because you can end up using a lot less loading in the stretch position.
And so you're not getting the same benefits as you would be doing for the gastroc because the effort
levels too low.
Now, This is why I said you need to be then super clear.
Are you referring to a stretch position, pause where you're holding the activation on it?
Or are you taking these mini breaks between repetitions and you know, kind of doing a completely
relaxed static stretch?
Well, those are separate things.
And if you're, if you're queuing, if you're telling people to do that, then you know, be clear about
it.
But as we've described, it probably isn't going to help you because all you're doing is breaking the
strength training set up with little static stretches, which is going to create accumulation of
calcium amyloid fatigue and start to reduce the stimulation of your strength training set.
So you're making your strength training set worse by taking these little breaks to do static
stretches between repetitions.
Much better, as everybody who knows anything about this subject has been saying for the last kind of
day or so.
Much better is just to take the static stretch out of that part of your workout and do it at the
end.
You know, I mean, this is all really kind of logical Physiology.
It's messy because we're describing things that are, you know, not immediately, you know, kind of
clear to everybody.
But in fundamentally the Physiology is very, very logical.
It's like if the muscle is activated, this happens.
If the range of motion is doing this, this happens.
And it's like just work through the variables that you've got and you know, the answer will drop out
to the end now.
So I think you know, the, the, the activated stretch position contraction is a very different animal
from a passive static stretch in the same kind of, you know, ish range of motion.
They're doing different things.
I think that's one final question for you.
Hopefully it's not too messy.
Let's say, let's keep going with this calf example.
You know we've talked about how the calf can experience stretch mediated hypertrophy and so you're
doing this pause in this length and position, potentially getting some of that stretch of mediated
hypertrophy for a period of time.
And if you don't get into greater ranges of motion, then you're going to see a plateau there.
But if you do achieve graded ranges of motion, then you're going to continue to see stretch mediated
hypertrophy occur for as long as you continue to do so, which would allow one to see longer
adaptations in stretch so they can achieve more stretch mediated hypertrophy.
Doing a passive static stretch afterwards, or well it doesn't matter when you're doing it, or doing
a stretch where the muscles active like what people are generally recommending at the moment with
their calf is.
Well, this is what I was mentioning when I said if you look at studies that have measured the impact
of activation in a muscle on range of motion, even a tiny little increase in torque as a result of
activated muscle, it starts shaving degrees off your range of motion, maximum range of motion.
So you're not going to have an.
Experience of motion.
So that's the stimulus.
Do that, yeah.
Say do that stretch, active stretch and then you measure passive stretch afterwards.
Does that increase range of motion and passive stretch or not?
So eccentric traits, OK, this is the problem.
So if you look at eccentric training studies, you'll find that maximum range of motion in the
trained muscle increases.
So like people look at those and they go, oh, I can do active statics, active stretches.
Well, some researchers call eccentric training doesn't matter.
You can activate the muscle and stretch it and it will give you an increase in range of motion the
same way that a passive static stretch gives you an increase in range of motion.
I don't believe these are working through the same mechanism.
I think that all your increases in range of motion in a eccentric training context are fascicle
length related.
So I think basically you're changing the structure of the muscle to make the range of motion
increase.
I think that's what's happening in situations of length and partials and stretch positions, sort of
pauses and any stretch position strength training exercise that also gives you an increase in range
of motion.
I think they're all basically doing it structurally with an increase in fiscal length.
Static stretching kind of gives you a stretch tolerance improvement at the same time as you're
getting your smaller increases in fiscal length.
Now, I think if we were to look at, and I don't think these data exist, but I think if you were to
study the effects of eccentric training over a longer period of time, you'd find that range of
motion stopped increasing around about the time where fiscal length stopped increasing.
So a couple of months.
So you've got either you did some long term eccentric training studies and trained people who've you
know, already maxed out their psycho myogenesis, or you just kind of followed people for like 4 or
5-6 months.
I think either way what you would find is that eccentric training stopped or any kind of strength
training that's producing psychomatogenesis stopped producing increases in range of motion after a
couple of months.
I don't think you would get a continued effect.
Static stretching tends to produce an increase in a range of motion for as long as you do it.
As long as you keep pushing into new residence of motion, it kind of obviously gives you those new
ranges of motion.
Now the interesting thing about that is that as you push into those new ranges of motion, the cycle
emergence continues happening alongside it.
So your static stretching is going to kind of work with you for a much longer period of time subject
to your ability to continue increasing ranges of motion.
So if you've got, I mean, and this is another one of those really wild kind of observations because,
you know, the people who are arguing about this stuff, you know, are people who've already got more
than three months of strength training experience and probably can't experience soccer, married
Genesis as a result unless they go into new ranges of motion.
And to do that, they're probably going to need a static stretch with a relaxed muscle.
Yeah, to make that happen.
Yeah, so you're better off doing that static stretch with a length and partial then.
So you're better off doing the length and partial of the gastroc to train the gastroc and then
afterwards do you static stretch.
I mean that would be the perfect workout for training the gastroc.
You would do the gastroc length and partial not for the purposes of sargomerogenesis because it's
not going to happen in that range of motion, but for the purposes of targeting the gastroc.
You would, by making it partial, you would make the resistance profile.
I mean, ultimately.
You'll just get some of this stretch made that happen because when you're getting not.
If you're trained, you weren't.
No, because, well, OK, if, if, if you, if you, if you have the, if you have the ability to set the
machine up to allow you to continue going into more and more ranges of motion, I mean.
They're not able to access because you've been doing the static stretching.
Because you're doing the static stretching afterwards, then you'll start to see some combined
effects of that.
Sorry, I don't think like this because my ankles don't really let me do that.
But so basically, yes, if you were in a situation where you could continue going into new ranges of
motion in your strength during exiles because the machine's set up in a way that lets you do that,
then yes, your static stretch done.
I well, I mean, technically done anytime, but you would, we would program it afterwards.
I mean, you could do it anytime, but done afterwards, you know, would start to push you into new
ranges of motion.
So yeah, they, they do actually have a synergistic effect to the extent that you, you know, your
setup is allowing you to do that.
I mean, if your setup is such that you bottom out each at the end of each repetition, then you can't
go into new ranges of motion because your setup isn't allowing you to go into new ranges of motion.
You have to set it up so that you can go into new ranges of motion most of the time for that to
happen.
Feel happy with that conclusion.
I feel like that is for someone who's wanting to really focus on calf growth or gastroc growth,
that's probably the the formula that's going to get one there.
Absolutely.
You know, I think, I think that length and partial pair that with a seated calf raise and do some
static stretching afterwards for the gastroc.
I think that's a really interesting, you know, and it's not enormously, you know, kind of
burdensome.
You know, we're not, we're not kind of in comparison with Reg Parks program that we looked at like
in comparison with that, you know, you could just do, you know, one, one set of seated coverage, one
sort of length and partial, you know, toe press and throw a static stretch on the end.
I mean, the different position was interesting.
Yes, I'm.
Sure.
And that would be the next level up.
You would absolutely look at that, but only in the toe press.
Yeah.
And then?
Because really, for the soleus it's not relevant.
Something you could do to increase motor unit recruitment, maybe single leg or something.
That'll be an interesting next level as well, potentially.
But of course, we would always do that for any measure that we were focusing on exactly.
Again, I think we did it.
We solved the the calf question.
Is there anything else you want to you know?
The, the important thing is that, and this kind of pairs with the observation that I made on social
media today.
And I mentioned to you, the important thing is that, you know, we're demonstrating or walking people
through the line of reasoning that gets you from, you know, the beginning to here.
Because if you want to be able to assess, and people ask me this question all the time, how do I
assess, you know, the information that this person gives me, the information that that person gives
me, the information that somebody else gives me, you know, not being an expert in that subject, you
know, because that's the silly thing where, you know, you're kind of putting yourself in a situation
where you're requiring of yourself the ability to compare 2 expert opinions and judge between them.
Well, that's just silly to begin with.
I mean, if you state it like that, it's obvious.
It's impossible because you're kind of claiming to have more expertise than the two experts that
you're assessing.
Well, if that were the case, why are you even listening to this podcast?
Because you already have the expertise.
So it's irrelevant.
I mean, I spend zero time listening to other experts 0 you know, all my time is spent looking at
source data.
I don't spend any time looking at other expert opinions.
So, you know, it's, it's a really interesting question.
So what I think we're trying to do here, or I've been trying to do here and you know, we've been
working through together is demonstrating that the outcomes that we are recommending, explaining,
suggesting are the output of a series of physiological observations or, you know, physiological kind
of phenomena that you know, are relatively all described and you can just put them together and you
end up in this place.
So there's you understand a little bit about fatigue, you understand a little bit about MOTI and
recruitment, you understand a little bit about, you know, neural mechanical matching, and you
understand a little bit about psychomagenesis.
And you put all of that together and you end up with these outcomes.
And it's very logical step by step process.
You know, it's not a kind of, well, I want to get this, I want to get to this outcome that I prefer
to do.
So therefore, how can I to justify an argument that gets me there?
It's like, hopefully, even though the listeners may not be able to evaluate the, the, the scientific
claims being made here, hopefully they can at least see that the process is logical, you know,
whereas in many other situations, a fitness influence might be explaining something to you.
And it is kind of a little bit disjointed because there isn't a logical process that's being
followed.
It's like they have an outcome that they want to argue for and they piece together an argument that
gets in there, you know, whereas what this is, is a starting from the ground up physiological series
of observations that ends up in place that we're at.
And it's pretty much the same series of observations and the same set of physiological data that we
refer to in any situation.
So it's like we have a pattern that's always applicable.
Hopefully that counts for something.
That's what I'm saying.
You know, hopefully that counts for a little bit in terms of getting people some reassurance that
even though they may not be able to evaluate the expert claims made here with the expert maintains
made somewhere else, at least they can see that the ones being made here follow a very logical
pattern if nothing else.
Yeah, that's interesting.
The difference between the process or the outcome of just starting the outcome and then working
backwards is not the same thing of starting with the process and the Physiology and working out.
Where does that lead us?
You know, and, and just like the fact that I'll get halfway through explaining something and I'll
suddenly realize that I haven't thought about one of the possible rabbit holes that goes off the
edge of that thing.
And, you know, on, on the one hand, that makes me look a little bit silly because it's like, well,
why haven't you thought about that?
But on the other hand, it's like, well, that's because this is a process driven, you know, kind of
conversation.
You know, every time somebody asks me a question, I start with, well, what do I know?
And then I work my way up to the answer.
I don't go, oh, well, that answer is this answer because here it is written on this page in this
textbook that tells me what the answer is.
That's not how it works.
It's like, well, what do I know?
You know, well, I know how muscle contractions work.
I know you know how fatigue mechanisms work and how motive.
And so you kind of build the, you know, the knowledge base up that we're always referring to.
And then you build up your outcome and the outcome is or the outcome.
We use the word outcome for other contexts.
But the answer to the question is being posed is derived from the process of working through these
physiological concepts.
And the physiological concepts never change.
You know, it's just the question might be different in certain circumstances.
So hopefully even the fact that I kind of get myself into a row that I haven't thought about before
is illustrative of the fact that we're not just making stuff up for the sake of, you know, kind of,
oh, well, I think this, therefore I'm going to make some reasons up.
You know, it's like, no, I believe in this set of physiological concepts and whatever answers they
throw out is what I'll kind of go with because that's my model.
My perspective, it makes the application conversation much more interesting if I can start with
what's the Physiology telling us and then how can we creatively apply that?
I find that a much more interesting conversation Then here's this arbitrary technique or method that
people are using.
Let's just hope it works or let's try to justify it or whatever.
You know why I like the that's?
Exactly right.
But that's exactly what happens.
People come up with something and then they try to justify it.
And so they're kind of running around looking for reasons.
So what reason can I find that justifies this thing that I've already decided is cool?
And it's like we're doing things completely the opposite way around.
We're going, what do we know and where does it take us?
And sometimes it takes you places that you don't expect.
No, that's part of, as you say, part of the fun, part of the flexibility about the excitement of of
doing it.
It kind of sometimes you stumble across things that you haven't put together before and you're like,
actually that's really interesting.
Exactly.
And it's stuff that I wouldn't naturally want to do a lot of the time, like some of their, their
sort of methods and, and ideas that we might come up with from looking at some of this stuff and
talking about some of this stuff from a gym perspective.
Like that's not what I would have ever been drawn to or not what I would have naturally wanted to
do.
But it's like, Oh my God, that makes so much sense.
Let's try it.
And then it's like, oh, that, you know, it feels good, it's working.
It's, it's getting results.
I want, you know, let's, let's stick with that.
So it is, it's I've, I've come done both, right?
Like I've come out of the world where it was like, this is how you do it.
Don't question it, just this is it.
And it, it didn't feel fulfilling.
And then to get to a point where it's like we can actually start to be creative and part of that
creative process because we understand the Physiology that's like, Oh my God, this is, it's like,
it's a revelation.
It's like, oh, we could do this.
Like I'm so excited when it comes to you.
It's like, Hey, have you thought about if we could do this?
And, you know, does this sort of, you know, like we were talking about classes the other week and
the internal focus of attention with classes, like, oh, what about if we do this?
It's like, oh, that actually makes sense.
And it just changes when I'm just rambling now, but it just changes.
The conversation becomes so much more rewarding when it's actually anchored in physiological meaning
as opposed to this symbolic meaning of this is how you're meant to do it.
Yeah, absolutely.
And I think a lot of the resistance and I was, I was talking with a couple of other people about
this as well.
And I think a part of the resistance that people have to this approach, you might call it Physiology
based, you know, kind of programming, is that it takes a lot of your power away because at the end
of the day, you, you're kind of surrendering to the algorithm that you've kind of created.
And you kind of go, well, like people ask me questions like, well, does this split work better than
that split?
Well, I already made an algorithm that gives you my best answer.
So just use that.
Like, I may not agree with it like emotionally all the time, but it's my best effort in terms of
like what I think is happening.
So I'll just defer to it.
And I kind of like surrendered the kind of the power to the to the model and said, well, whatever
the model kind of sort of throws out is my best guess.
You know, now you don't.
Of course, if you don't like an outcome, you don't like the way of training, you don't have to train
like this.
Like not everyone has to train perfectly all the time.
It's like, well, there's preferences and all kinds of things going on, but at least it gives you a
starting point of knowing what you think the best kind of way of of achieving a particular goal
might be.
But I think the reason that people object to is it really does take the power away.
People who got accustomed to being, as you say, be able to say, you know, I think this way of
training is the best way of doing this.
And because I'm this authority and I have all this, all these social media followers and 10s of
thousands of people doing my programs, I am justified in claiming that this is the best way of doing
it.
And I think people react.
They've been accustomed to be able to do that.
And when you come along with an algorithm that kind of says, well, maybe it's not the best way, they
get very upset.
But at the end of the day, I think as you say, it opens up more doors in terms of creativity, in
terms of enjoyment of programming and that ability to be flexible.
But I said to you the other day, and again, I'm now rambling a little bit, but this is a really
important point.
I said to you the other day that I have strongly felt for a long time that most of the complexity
that people write, you know, strength coaches write into the training programs is literally for
entertainment purposes.
And it actually is counterproductive to the purpose of the program.
You know, and I said it's very, it's almost unheard of for me to ever see a complexity element,
something that made the program more complicated than literally just full body three times a week
that was better than something as simple as full body three times a week.
And then you came up with a few things recently and had been going on with these recently.
And I've just been sitting back going, this is the first time I've seen complexity that actually
adds any value.
And that's because of what you've been doing with the template that we've got in terms of the model
and the physiological reality.
And you've been actually starting to push into territory that, as you mentioned, potentially with
internal focus on clusters and things like that.
You're actually starting to make changes that I think have actual added value that aren't just
entertainment.
As that's really exciting.
Because that feels like we've started to open a door into a new space where you can kind of have
that complexity again and yet also have it work, you know, and add value rather than just be
entertainment for the purposes of making the client feel like they're getting more value.
Because ultimately that's really what it has been in the past.
It's like, you know, a client looks at it full body three times a week and go, why am I paying this
person to program like this for me?
Like, well, because they knew it was better than what you were doing before.
But as a separate question, you know, but you know, recognizing that people do have a tendency to
see value in complexity, is there a way that we can actually have both?
Can we have a value added complexity?
And I think as I said to you very recently, when we looked at some programs together that you were
writing, I'm starting to see the possibility of that happening, which is very, very cool.
So I'm kind of mention that as a way to kind of wrap up my ramblings on this on this very long
podcast that we've got.
OK, We'll call it there.
Thank you.
Thank you everyone for listening.
We appreciate you as always.
We got lots of good feedback last week, so we appreciate that.
Thank you for sharing, commenting, liking all that stuff.
Please continue to do so, and we hope you'll join us next week.