Episode: 003 Training splits - what to consider when splitting full body workouts into upper / lower workouts
URL: https://open.spotify.com/episode/5mVm0UvMouHQPK3ku0nh9d
Published: 2025-06-08
================================================================================

Welcome back to another episode of Hypertrophy past and Present.
And as always, we have a new slash, I guess old workout plan to talk about with you guys today.
So one from the silver era before anabolics infiltrated bodybuilding.
And we have a topic that Chris, you'll discuss with us in a bit more detail later on.
Now before I jump into the workout plan, is anything you want to start us off with or you're happy
for many get started?
I'm happy for you to get started.
I'm excited about this one.
I think we've got a really good connection between the routine that you've selected and the topic
that we're going to be talking about from a physiological point of view.
This is a little bit different to the plans we've talked about over the last couple of weeks.
So obviously we've covered two different plans so far and they we sort of highlighted how they
evolved over time.
The second plan being about 2530 years later than the first plan.
Now what we have today is a plan that was discussed by Clancy Ross.
So Clancy was a a silver bodybuilder.
He won Miss America in 1945 and the plan we're going to talk about today was part of in the lead up
to his Miss America win.
Now he obviously did follow different plans over time, so I'm not saying this is the only plan that
he followed, but there's a couple of really interesting things about this plan.
So I think it's definitely worth us discussing because it does stand out a little bit from some of
the other plans that we have talked about or we'll talk about now.
For some of you who've heard of Clancy, you may be aware of him because he's well known for being an
advocate for the set system.
So the the two plans we've discussed so far, they use single sets.
They didn't even talk about sets.
Well, the the York one sort of talked about it in the sense of like adding extra exercises mainly.
So Clancy, he really was a big advocate for adding an additional sets.
Now this was, so this idea of adding sets sort of developed in the 40s, Nineteen 40s and in 19 fees
it became a lot more common.
And before we have the commonplace set system, which is your standard, you know, 2-3 sets of however
many repetitions, what we had was what was called the split set system.
And so the plan that we're talking about today, this was an early version of the set system and it
was what was being referred to as a split set system, which basically means they would repeat the
exercise within the same workout, but they wouldn't do it as straight sets.
They would do it kind of like a circuit.
So they would do an exercise, do another exercise, maybe do another one, and then they go back to
the first one and then they do another one, do another one, and then they go back to it again later.
So most exercises were being repeated sort of two or three times within the workout.
So backdrop.
So Clancy, he's come from doing full body single sets and then lead up to before his Miss America
when he's now started to implement this split set system.
So an example of this split set set system worker that he was following was as follows.
So it was an upright row going into an incline press going into a lateral raise, and then an
alternate curl and press with a dumbbell, which is an interesting exercise.
A pullover and a floor press, a bent over row, a dumbbell curl, a dip, sit up side bend.
And essentially he repeated each of those effectively 2 more times each.
And then he added in squats, leg press and calf raise.
And he actually performed those as sets.
So the upper body stuff was as a circuit, but sets were actually being used in the lower body
exercises.
Now he followed this for I'm not sure how long, a period of time he he says.
And then what he found was by the time he was getting to his lower body exercises, he was too
fatigued and they were suffering and his legs were a low point for him.
He needed to emphasize his legs.
So what he ended up doing is actually, and this is in the 40s, so this is really early on for this
to happen.
And he split out that workout and he kept the workout the same, but he split the upper body
exercises to the morning and the lower body exercises till later in the day.
Now a couple of interesting things here.
So he turned this into an upper lower, but he didn't do the way most people do up and low today.
He didn't do, you know, upper, lower day off, up and lower day off, day off.
He did upper and lower in the same day.
So he's still training Monday, Wednesday, Friday.
Now he does talk about in the lead up to some comps sometimes he would then go up and lower, up and
lower on on consecutive days.
But he preferred, especially for longer periods of time, doing it like this, where you would do up
in the morning and lower in the afternoon.
And there's one more point I want to make, which I think is very interesting.
And he talks about when his cardiovascular capacity improved, he actually went back to to
integrating this as a single workout.
So he removed the split and just did it all in one session again.
Now there's a lot there.
I'm going to pause.
Chris, what are your initial feelings, thoughts about all of this?
There's so much here to talk about, but you know, if I if I go too deep into this material too
quickly, then I'll be basically just jumping straight into the second-half of our planned call for
today.
So let me just start from the from the beginning and just, you know, look at some of these
exercises.
I know that that's not our focus for today, but it's always interesting to just look at some of
these exercises.
So in terms of the excise selection, I mean, obviously you know, we've got some differences here
from what we talked about previously.
We've got a floor press which is essentially A horizontal press.
It's like kind of like the the chest press or bench press that we would have today.
And so obviously that's slightly different from the aesthetic choices that we've been seeing
previously where we didn't really have much chest work.
It was all kind of overhead pressing and either pressing work was all sort of focusing on the
deltoids.
So that's an interesting there.
Even so, we do still have quite a strong focus on a deltoid development.
You know, we've still got upright row in there, we've got a lateral raise in there, we've got an
incline press in there and we've got the the curl and press for the dominoes.
There's a lot of shoulder work, despite the fact that we've now introduced this slight diversion
from the very strong unique or not unique so much as targeted if you like focus on the deltos.
We're now kind of just saying, well, yeah, we're going to keep all of that.
We're going to add in chest work as well.
In terms of back work, I think it's a little bit on the weak side.
We've got a ullover and we've got a row.
We don't have that sort of wide grip ullup or ulldown that I keep looking for whenever I look at
these routines.
Interesting.
We have got a dip in there, which I don't think we've seen previously.
I mean, maybe it would have been in one of the alternate exercises, but it wasn't in the main
listing, which is an interesting choice because dips can be really, really effective for that sort
of triceps development.
Not really.
It's interesting to see that appearing for the first time.
Now.
Previously I mentioned that when I see a leg raise, it's very interesting because that is rectus
femoris from a hip flex point of view, and that kind of starts to help you get over the fact that
you don't have a knee extension.
So we saw that appearing for the first time last time and now I'm seeing it again here.
I.
Don't believe he was doing the leg raise and then when he split it, that's when he added the leg
raise and I believe he added maybe the leg press there as well.
So he did add additional lower body exercises when he was able to split the session.
So when he was doing them as a combined session, it was just the squats and the calf raises, the
laser, right?
And then when he expanded the sessions by doing them in separate times a day or even on sequential
days, he's adding those extra 2 exercises.
Interesting choice.
So I don't see the value so much in duplicating the squat with the leg press.
I mean, there might be some differences according to foot position on the plate or I don't know what
the equipment would have looked like.
But certainly that leg raise is a really interesting choice because it shows that knowledge or
understanding of regional growth being kind of possible, certainly within the quadriceps group.
Now, final comment on exercise selection that I have is just something that we've mentioned multiple
times.
And it's the absence or the underuse of deadlift variations for the hamstrings.
Because really when I look at these kind of programs and when we've looked at these and analyzed
these together in the past, it's like where's the hamstrings work?
I think we're spoiled for choice these days.
We've got some really nice hamstrings curl machines.
We've got the ability to do 45° back extensions.
We've got as many deadlift variations at any height that you might want to use, you know, in any
variation that you can think of.
And those are all possible to us.
When you look at these routines, like even given the lack of equipment, there is still a little bit
of a deficit there in that regard.
And so you kind of wonder whether it's just the fact that they're not looking at them or they're not
thinking about them or it's just not something that's kind of occurred as an important factor.
But certainly that would be, I think the thing that really jumps out to me as an omission is that
I'm sure.
It does add deadlifts in later on, right?
In a couple of years time it does appear in this program.
So it's interesting it's not here yet.
That's all I've really got to say about the excise selection side of things.
I think really, you know, the, the comments regarding the structure of the workouts with it being
initially a very, very long workout.
Now actually let's just pause there for a moment and introduce a question that we didn't talk about
before we we started the podcast, but I hope that it is relevant, which is that a lot of the
questions that I get when I do a weekly Q&A are related to how many sets is it possible to do in a
workout.
Now I think we can answer that in the physiological section of today's call, but I think what would
be useful now is just to pause and say what was the perspective of that question in these in these
periods of time that we're describing, You know, how many sets, how many exercises were people
doing?
Because you've shared some information about this with me before offline.
And I think it's really interesting just to go, go there for a moment.
A lot of the routines I think you mentioned on this podcast before, a lot of the routines early on
tended to have sort of 10 to 12 exercises in them.
It was a number that really comes up again and again and again.
But two things I think you've mentioned 1 is that sometimes people would do more exercises than
that.
And also when you start to introduce set systems like this, I mean, I'm thinking this is a upper
body 10 exercise circuit and that's being done three times.
So that's thirty sets in total just from the upper body section.
So should we just like kind of go there for a moment?
Yeah, definitely.
So there's a few interesting things when you look at sort of total set numbers in a in a workout,
because even the guys who were doing very high sets like Clancy here with 30 sets in the upper body
session, a lot of these guys would often talk about the value in that.
We call them limited programs where for a period of time you drop all the way back down to often 8
to 10 sets in a session.
And they often talked about these being very effective for, for gaining bulk.
So just being very effective for gaining total muscle mass and for people who maybe had a very
active jobs who were, you know, quite maybe had lower recovery capacity and things like that.
So on the lower end of that, you tend to see that sort of eight to 10 sets of per session.
And then on the upper end and and you mentioned that sort of 12 set number, that 12 set number
repeatedly comes up as kind of how many exercises does it take to do a, a full body program
thoroughly?
And that tends to be the number.
And then, you know, expanding from there, they often talk about essentially doubling that.
So a pretty standard number would be about 24 sets in a session.
And then they talk about these sort of superheroes.
You Reg Parks, for example, who you know, was known to have just insane, you know, work ethic and
recoverability and, and I guess, you know, cardiovascular fitness and some of these guys and Steve
Reeves, you know, he talks about some of his programs as well.
And they tend to be somewhere in the realms of about 30 sets.
Now, one more comment I want to make on that is if you track this over time, once you get the mid
fees, what you see is a lot of the what I call fluff and people get quite offended at me calling it
fluff, but I'm talking things like side bands and neck exercises and form exercises.
A lot of these tend to drop out and from their sort of mid 50s onwards, there might be some of them,
but there's very few.
And so when we see these exercise or these workout plans that are, you know, often 3034 sets,
they're generally including six, eight sets of quote UN quote, fluff, ABS, bends, whatever.
So if I was to subtract that in my mind, I would say we're we're typically seeing a Grange or
somewhere between sort of 10 to 24 sets up to about 30.
With that top end from sort of maybe 2425 to 30 generally being a lot easier kind of exercises that
probably aren't creating an issue.
Absolutely.
Those are usually single join exercises.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Because I think this is really interesting because a lot of the questions I get come from the
perspective of people who are saying clearly it's impossible to do more than sort of 1015 sets, you
know?
And, and I think what's really cool about this data set that we're describing is that we're talking
about pre anabolics, We're talking about people who are training before the introduction of
anabolics into bodybuilding scene and therefore would have had a relatively clear, unbiased
perspective on what their workouts were doing and how recoverable they were.
And also, and I'm again, I'm kind of pre empting what we're going to talk about shortly.
And it's really interesting listening to the way that you describe his experience in running these
workouts that we were talking about Clancy roles, these these workouts that he was running, because
he's referencing the negative effects of fatigue, you know, and it's just very, very cool to see
that in that period of time, the negative effects of fatigue were clearly perceptible, you know, and
yet post anabolic suddenly hypertrophy researchers think that fatigue causes hypertrophy.
So many of them do.
Even today, there's reviews and papers and opinions being written and the titles imply that fatigue
is causing hypertrophy.
You know, and it's like, clearly it's not.
I mean, that's just Physiology.
I mean they make it so clear, these old timers, I mean they, they talk about in the lead up to
contest, if you are doing longer workouts or you are doing, you know, six days a week or whatever.
All of them talk about taking a couple weeks off after the contest and they say how important it is
to take that couple of weeks off.
They know that the fatigue is accumulated.
Absolutely.
And I think it's just very cool to see these kind of understandings realizations in that period of
time before the contamination of the experience was kind of introduced by a separate stimulus.
So yeah, anyway, the, the the, the kind of the The upshot of that is that, you know, we can look at
these guys and we can see that, you know, they were doing higher volumes in single sessions than we
normally talk about today.
We tend to talk still about that kind of 10 to 12 numbers being a a reasonable session volume.
They were doing a lot more than that and it was working for them.
And that's a really interesting kind of observation, and I think the answer will become clear as we
dive into the Physiology, to be honest.
I think we should just jump straight in because I think it's it follows on from this conversation
perfectly.
Absolutely.
So essentially what I'd like to do then and when we talk about the physiological side of things is
just to explain why all of those observations are mirrored exactly by physiological reality.
So if we are doing a full body workout three times a week, what we're going to see is that the
problem arises, as people tell me repeatedly in that in my Instagram questions, the problem arises
because you're going to end up doing a lot of exercises and potentially a lot of sets in a single
workout.
Is that what we've just been saying?
So you've got 20, you're faced with the possibility or, or the, or the challenge of doing sort of
1520 sets in a workout and you're going no, no, no, no, that's not something that I feel, you know,
equal to doing.
Now the issue there is that as we've talked about in the context of exercise order, as I've talked
about and written about in the context of exercise order, the issue is that over the course of a
workout you are building supraspinal central nervous system fatigue.
Now how does that happen?
It doesn't happen the way people think it does.
It actually happens because of the sensations that are occurring in your body as a result of the
metabolic activities that you're engaging in.
Now there's a number of routes to get you there, but basically the three main ones are if you have
cardiovascular activity, as in you start to get out of breath, then you are going to feel that as a
perception sensation in your lungs.
And that's going to add to your feeling of discomfort and bring you closer to your maximum tolerable
perception of effort, which is what determines how much effort you can ultimately produce in a set.
Now, if some of that effort availability is being used to tolerate that discomforting cardiovascular
sensation, you can't use that to create motor unit recruitment.
So you end up with your recruitment levels dropping despite you hitting maximal efforts.
Some of that effort is going towards the toleration of that cardiovascular sensation.
That's the main one.
Second one is that if you have burning sensations in the muscles from metabolites, that's going to
do exactly the same thing.
And the third one is that as you produce lactate and it goes around the body, it starts to produce
an inflammatory response and that again does the same thing.
It starts to make you feel tired and fatigued and basically not really wanting to be in the gym
doing the thing that you're doing.
Now those three things all are tied to your cardiovascular fitness.
So if your cardiovascular fitness is weak, then what you're going to find is that very quickly as
you go through setup to set after set, all of those sensations start to build quite rapidly and make
you feel very uncomfortable and not wanting to continue.
If your cardiovascular fitness is much higher than that, what you're going to find is you're able to
then do a lot more and continue to exercise, you know, doing more and more sets and accumulate a
large recession volume.
So ultimately, I think one of the interesting things is that people who have that high level of
cardiovascular fitness, and I don't think it's a stretch to argue that people in 1940 would have had
a higher level of cardiovascular fitness than the average person today.
You know, if you kind of see that like that gap and say, well, OK, well why was it that Clancy Ross
could do 20-30 sets and actually make that work for him in a single session and I can't.
Well, maybe it's that his physical activity levels across the day were a lot higher than yours, or
maybe his history of, you know, kind of sort of aerobic exercise or whatever it may be just physical
activity.
These guys were in the military at some point around this time as well.
Exactly, exactly.
So I think ultimately there's this sort of, no, I don't think that aerobic exercise directly
produces hypertrophy.
I think that's a silly idea.
But I do think that having a high level of cardiovascular fitness will support us doing higher
session volumes in the context of these full body routines where you're trying to do everything in
one session.
So there is that interesting kind of interplay there between that, that, that sort of cardiovascular
side and the and the muscular side.
Now one final comment on this is that you've got one cardiovascular system, but you've actually got
a whole load of muscles going on at the same available to you to be used in the exercise at the same
time.
And the bigger that muscle mass is relative to your cardiovascular system, the more of a problem
we're going to have with cardiovascular limitations.
So This is why I say to people, if you've got issues with cardiovascular kind of recovery between
sets, you need to shrink the amount of muscle mass you're using in exercise.
Doing squats and deadlifts and bench presses and you know, kind of let pull downs is probably going
to be more challenging than doing the single joint stuff.
So the same thing applies if you start to increase muscle mass overall.
So Anabolics is a really interesting one because if you start to get really huge amounts of muscle
mass and be able to move seriously large amounts of weight, you're going to be pushing your
cardiovascular system really, really hard as a result of just having that high level of muscle mass.
And that's a problem we actually see in some of the athletes in strength and power sports when they
can move incredible amounts of weight really fast, you know, kind of like sort of track and field
athletes, then you're in a situation like, well, they're going to have a cardiovascular burden over
the course of that training session, which is absolutely just crazy.
And it doesn't look like it's going to be crazy, but it actually is.
So you've got these really interesting kind of dynamics going on between the cardiovascular system
being, you know what it is and then all this muscle mass around the edges of it kind of making use
of that energy requirement.
And then you have that interplay between the two things.
So basically to summarize what we're saying is that the challenge in the context of a full body
program is that ability to recover cardiovascularly.
And if the cardiovascular system is not up to the challenge, then you're going to find that the
ability to do 2030 sets is definitely curtailed.
One thing I find really interesting with that is this limitation is specific to full body.
Because once we divide the body into whether it's up or lower, push, pull, legs, whatever else it
might be, suddenly we run into a whole new limitation which is just per muscle volume, which is
going to be driven by damage, calcium ion accumulation, etcetera.
So the the limitations or even the I guess capacity or potential, the ceiling for full body is
actually quite unique in that regard.
Yeah, it's definitely a different kind of set of problems.
So if we now jump to say, well, OK, let's look at doing upper, lower and sequential days.
So like the Clancy Ross program was going upper lower repeated.
So a lot of people ask me this question.
It's like I've got this full body routine that's going, you know, sort of three days a week.
Could I, instead of doing that full body routine three days a week, literally just cut each workout
in half and do upper lower on six days a week and just go to the gym every single day, six days a
week, take one day off and would that basically be the same thing?
No, it wouldn't.
So what happens is that your post workout fatigue is exclusively related to the damage processes,
the calcium I related processes which 'cause their own inflammation response, which causes
suprospinal fatigue to a totally different, oh, it's the same overall framework mechanism, but it's
coming from a different place.
So suprospinal fatigue in a workout is coming from essentially the cardiovascular system.
Suprospinal fatigue post workout is coming from the muscle damage.
So what happens is if you do your upper lower workout, sorry, upper workout on one day and then come
back and do the lower workout the following day.
What your upper workout did in terms of muscle damage is now going to be the primary driver of your
supraspinal central nervous system fatigue the following day.
And of course that's going to reduce recruitment on that second day doing that lower body workout.
Now the interesting thing is that the two drivers and are very, very different.
So somebody could have a really huge cardiovascular capacity, be able to bash through 2030 sets in a
workout, but they might be really, really susceptible to muscle damage.
Now, I mean, that actually describes the track and field athlete really, really accurately.
So you could have a person who's very, very cardiovascularly fit, but muscle damage is very, very
kind of difficult for them to recover from.
They would be much better off doing that upper, lower.
Sorry, that that that full body program and do the whole thing in one day, take the next day off and
then do the whole thing again on the the you know, the Wednesday or the Friday or whatever it is in
the week that they're doing.
In contrast, somebody's the opposite way around who perhaps has much more resistance to the muscle
damage problem but doesn't have that cardiovascular fitness.
They probably would find that actually getting it up and lower.
I'm going well, OK, you know, I'm not going to be able to do a whole full body workout in one guy.
I'm just going to split it down into a chunk and then come back the following day and do a smaller
amount.
Then that would be sorry of the lower body because it's both of them and then smaller then that
actually then works for them because the bigger challenge is actually the cardiovascular side of it,
not the muscle damage side of it.
So it's really, really interesting to see.
It basically depends on what fatigue mechanism you're trying to withstand.
And because they are so different, one is cardiovascular and one is ultimately calcium.
I related.
You actually have two separate challenges to meet and one of them you might find you can meet much
more successfully than the other.
Now, did you want to jump in there?
I was just going to say it's interesting that we're, we're effectively talking about the same type
of fatigue, but different ways of getting there.
And so it's interesting that you can have, like you've pointed out there, 2 very different types of
people who are going to benefit from one or the other.
And ultimately the outcome can be the same.
Like if they're going to the wrong style or training for them, they're going to end up with that
same negative outcome.
I don't know if you're going to touch on this later, but I'm sure there's people listening to this
thinking, well, how do I know which one of those I am?
How do I sort of differentiate?
Is that something we can talk about?
So it's actually very easy to monitor your own cardiovascular system.
You know, you can literally do it by how it feels and you can do it with a heart rate monitor.
So anybody can do a full body workout and they can strap a heart rate monitor on the wrist and they
can just watch what their heart rate is doing over time.
And if they really want to get into it, you can get a plot for the whole session.
You can, you know, download it into excel.
You can do all kinds of things and study what your heart rate is doing over a period of time.
Basically, if your heart rate is going up during your set and then it's going back down and it's
going back down to your kind of normal walking around level or slightly above before you then do
your next set then, and that's just repeated pattern across your entire workout, That's a pretty
strong sign that your cardiovascular system is totally handling what you're throwing at it.
If your cardiovascular system is drifting up or your heart rate is drifting up over the session and
by the end of it it's, you know, not really going down very much between sets, then that's the
opposite situation.
That's telling you that you're really not handling the workload that you're throwing at your
cardiovascular system.
And it's basically just kind of sort of you're you're in this adverse state when you get to the end
of the workout.
Now, is that perfect?
No, because that's really just measuring the cardiovascular activity section.
And we've talked about 3 separate components.
We've talked about metabolites, we've talked about the inflammation.
So it's not doing everything, but it's a really good sort of starting point to get you to understand
whether or not you are in that category of people who perhaps might find long sessions with high
volume session volumes to be an issue.
There's a couple of things I think that are interesting about that as well in that you can actually
the way you layout the program can influence this quite a lot.
So if you're doing some of these more cardiovascularly demanding exercises earlier on, that's going
to have more of a negative impact.
So for me, I know I normally program most of my leg work at the end, especially if I'm going to
squat, I'll usually put that towards the end.
Back extensions I'll put towards the end just because I feel they gas me so much.
And so a lot of people, I don't know if you saw these comments, but a lot of people last week when
we looked at one of the training plans that actually started with bicep curls, a lot of people like,
why would you do bicep curls?
That doesn't make any sense.
But if you think about in this regard, we're doing 12 to 24 exercises, maybe it makes a lot of sense
to start with bicep curls and leave some of the heavy stuff towards the end.
And I think there's strategic decisions you can make in a variety of contexts.
For example, one of my preferred techniques is to alternate between cardiovascularly demanding
exercises and cardiovascularly non demanding exercises.
So I'll bounce between like the kind of the leg press or, you know, sort of for me, pulling
exercises really just cook me.
So like why I could pull down, you know, or row.
That tends to be sort of my, because that's just been my strength for so long.
And I tend to be able to move a lot of weight relative to the other exercises that I do.
And so ultimately that tends to be a problem.
So I tend to alternate and I'll go sort of like a leg press and then I'll do maybe something much
less demanding, as you say, biceps curls or something like that.
And then I'll go to a pull, a big sort of like pull down or something.
And then again, I'll go to triceps kind of exercise or something like that.
And it kind of just that alternation gives me the ability just to get a complete recovery.
Is it perfect?
No, but it starts you moving in the direction of managing your session as a whole session rather
than just kind of throwing exercises in any order whatsoever.
So I think there's a couple of things.
And I think, yeah, the movement, you know, nobody wants to go and do you know, the most
cardiovascular demanding exercise first, like squats and then find that the rest of the session is
completely written off.
Equally, if that's happening, I would kind of look at the squat and go, is that really necessary?
You know, is there an alternative that will get you the same answer?
I really love single leg leg presses for that reason because I can absolutely get everything I need
and not get cardiovascularly cooked for the rest of the session.
You know, I think there's strategic decisions that you're going to have to make or would be
benefiting would benefit from making in order to to sort of resolve some of these session issues.
This is where I think programming is so fun because it becomes, I always call it sort of the art of
programming here where, you know, you start thinking about, and I understand this physiological
underpinnings.
You know, it's not always so obvious on paper kind of why you're making some of those decisions.
So for me, one thing I like to do in context of what you just said is a lot of the time the
squatting exercise, I'll program that as clusters and I will put them at the start, but there'll be
classes of, you know, 2 repetitions.
So it's very little cardiovascular demand, whereas if I were to do you know, sort of 6 or 8 or 10 or
whatever score, I'd probably put that usually second last in my workout.
You know, another thing that you can that we haven't even talked about here is the, the duration of
the workouts.
You know, a lot of these, these old school workouts that were lasting hours, you know, they were
lasting 2 plus hours.
And people look at that and they, they immediately think that's such a negative thing.
I know they used to be this idea around, you know, cortisol elevating with longer sessions and all
these kind of stigma and people.
There's, there seems to be this mentality online at the moment where if a sessions longer than 45 to
60 minutes, you're doing something wrong.
But it's like, we'll hold that if you actually have 75 minutes, 90 minutes to dedicated to a full
body session, it might actually make it more effective based on what you're talking about here.
Yeah, absolutely.
I think that it's really the, the cardiovascular system that we're keeping an eye on.
And I think that's, you know, some people.
I mean, I've, I've told this story many, many times in my mentorship program that I've done.
But when I first started working as a personal trainer, I was lucky enough to work with a very wide
range of different groups of people in the area that I was living in, in the country that I was
living in at that time, which seems to vary quite a lot these days.
But the the, the place I was living in had a lot of endurance cyclists.
And so I actually got to do some strength training work with endurance cyclists with incredible
cardiovascular systems.
And it I at the time I was exclusively working.
I wasn't exclusively working.
I was kind of focusing more on the powerlifting side and I was interested in that for me.
And so it was fascinating watching what my recovery between sets of squats was like and what theirs
was.
So I would do, you know, a set of squats with relatively low repetitions and I would be absolutely
gassed for like 3 to 4 minutes.
And this is at the same time as I was also doing endurance cycling.
So I mean, I'm not, my cardiovascular system was not bad, it just wasn't in their league.
They would do the same kind of set and they would look at me afterwards within like 30 seconds.
It's like we're going to do the next one.
Then I'm like, that's just incredible.
I can't get my head around just a massive difference in recovery times.
Cardiovascularly, even though I'm capable of riding, you know, sort of 5000 miles, these guys could
just do that probably in half the time.
They're just incredible athletes and it was translating to this insane recovery between sets of
squads.
So I think cardiovascularly, it's really, really easy to get that information.
We just look at what cardiovascular recovery is doing post set of strength training and monitor that
and see whether it needs training.
Yeah.
And endurance athletes going to be able to just bash through the workout that you're doing probably
in half the time.
And it's totally fine that they do that because when like there's this idea a few years back that we
should all leave 3 minutes between sets of exercises.
And I'm like, hey, that's definitely wrong because I needed seven between 7 of my sets of squats
when I was about lifting.
But equally like your average kind of endurance cyclist might not even need that.
And it's not going to be the same for different exercises that use different amounts of muscle mass.
And it basically just comes back to is suprospinal fatigue, you know, kind of gone away because the
sensation has gone away.
And this comes back to the point that you mentioned earlier, which is that it's the same fatigue
mechanism.
And the reason it's the same fatigue mechanism whenever we talk about suprospinal fatigue.
So it's the same fatigue mechanism because it's literally just is there a sensation and is that
sensation bringing you closer to your maximum tolerable perception of effort?
If so, that's suprospinal CNFT.
How does that sensation go caused?
While that's where it varies, it can vary.
It can be the cardiovascular activity, it can be the metabolite burning sensation.
It can be inflammation, all of those in a workout, or it can be muscle damage causing inflammation
post workout.
And that's a completely different route that gets you to exactly the same place.
The reason it's the same place is because it's just a sensation.
So ultimately superspinal CNFT is one of those really interesting things that is a very, very
clearly defined model in the context of Mark Chorus psycho biological model of fatigue.
But you can get there through different routes and you can actually get there through a whole load
of other roots as well.
I mean, if you're in pain or, you know, discomfort for any other reason, I mean, we talked about,
you know, kind of like if the exercise is really unstable or if that's high coordination demand that
actually gets you to the same place because your brain is doing a effort perception related to the
balancing or the coordination issue.
Or if you're in pain for another reason, that's going to do the same thing.
So ultimately, it's all the same mechanism of fatigue.
It's just the roots to get there.
I know.
This is a tangent a little bit, but at one of the gyms that I go to, they've got a very good
pendulum, but but the floor is uneven and they've got these like foam pads underneath the legs or
whatever trying to make it a bit more even, but it's not.
And if you load it up heavily, you get this kind of wobbling kind of thing that's happening.
And you know, I'm in a pendulum, Scott.
I'm obviously stable like this.
It's not a hard movement for me to coordinate, but my output in that that, you know, wobbly pendulum
is so much lower than in a normal pendulum, so.
Yeah, your brain is.
Your brain is thinking about the wobble.
Exactly.
Exactly.
Yeah.
You can't ignore it.
You can't of it.
So the flip side, you've talked about the muscle damage getting you to this endpoint.
Is there a way that someone can identify how prone they are to that?
That's difficult.
So the way that I would always suggest monitoring for things like post workout central nervous
system fatigue is to measure something like.
So there's two ways of doing it really.
Either you could do a test whereby you do the upper lower on sequential days and then separately do
the upper lower and leave a day between them.
And that basically is just like my plateaus model where I say, if you're concerned that you might
not be recovering, just leave one extra day of rest and see if your performance suddenly jumps
upwards.
It's the same kind of idea.
So basically we're talking about doing sequential day workouts and then on a separate occasion we
just split them up and see how big can I.
Just spell that out for people.
Sure, go for it.
I have a feeling some people overlook this.
So obviously, let's say you're, you're normally doing up and lower, up and lower.
Let's just say that's your normal workout plan and you are progressing.
And maybe you're at A at a point where you're able to progress maybe 1 repetition every second
session on average.
So what you're saying there is give yourself that extra rest day between those sessions.
And if you continue to progress by, you know that half your repetition, 1 repetition, that's the
normal progression for you, right?
So you're saying obviously that that fatigue wasn't really affecting you, whereas if you now
progress by two repetitions in instead, obviously there was an impact down the fatigue because we
always need to consider, well, what is your current rate of progression anyway, Right.
So, you know, I'd hear this a lot from people, oh, you know, I'm still progressing or whatever.
It's like, OK, but compared to what you were doing, how does it actually look?
Yeah.
I mean, ultimately it's exactly the same thing that you would do if you were concerned about.
I mean, we talked about within session analysis by using heart rate monitors, for example, or
cardiovascular system, you could actually do the same thing.
You can just move exercises from one end of the workout to the other and see if exercise order is
causing you an issue.
So if you think that you're not recovering across a session, but you don't have the technology to
look at RA monitors or you just don't feel comfortable with doing that, totally fine.
Literally just reverse the order of your workout and see what happens if you're.
Important to note with that as well that that works predominantly for full body sessions.
It's not going to work if you're training that muscle.
No, it doesn't work if you're.
Yeah, obviously, I think a.
Better way to actually state that is you should move your last single joint exercise to 1st in the
session.
Or you know, vice versa.
Yeah, I mean, there's there's you can kind of look, you can eyeball the session yourself and see
what you think is doable.
I mean, if you've, if you're kind of fairly biceps dominant in a pulling exercise, then that can
create issues.
And conversely, triceps and and pressing.
I think ultimately just have a look at your session and see what you think is doable.
Hamstrings are a really good one.
So if you're own, like for me, I just can't, I'm an old man.
I literally just do hamstrings curls.
I do seated hamstrings curls.
That is my hamstrings exercise.
Nothing else in my workout is touching my hamstrings.
I can put that first, I can put that last and I get the same number of reps every time.
So that is, I think that probably the easiest one if you're kind of in that kind of old man
territory like I am, which probably none of my lessons are, but by the by, but you get the idea.
The point is that you're looking for an exercise, as you've rightly pointed out, that is unaffected
by the rest of your session from a local muscular fatigue point of view, you're looking for one
that's uniquely affected by the Super spinal fatigue mechanisms.
Move that from the beginning to the end and you'll see whether your session is creating issues
straight away.
I think.
So moving to the, the, the kind of the, the aspect or one aspect of the, of the routine that you
shared with us earlier, which I think is really interesting, is this idea.
Well, if, if, if we have identified that maybe we are more susceptible to muscle damage than we
would like to be and therefore it's creating an impact for us doing a repeated upper lower six days
a week.
We don't want to do that.
But equally we're looking at the list of exercises and we're going, I really don't want to do, you
know, kind of 30 sets in one session.
And that's what you want to do for your coverage of the body parts, your training.
Then you can split that across either halves of a day and you can do your basically your full body
routine and just cut it in half like Clancy Ross did and say I'm going to do upper in the morning
and I'm going to do lower in the afternoon.
Now this is a really interesting thing because ultimately how long you leave between the upper
workout and the lower workout determines whether you're falling into the category of it being a
within session CNS fatigue problem or a post session CNS fatigue problem.
And the reason for that is because muscle damage, which doesn't actually happen in the workout, it
happens after the workout.
This is one of those kind of like one day I should really write a list of all the things about
fatigue that Hypertroy researchers do not understand.
And I think this will be pretty high on the list.
Every time you talk to a Hypertroy researcher about muscle damage, they think it happens in the
workout.
They're like, oh, well, you know, the tearing forces.
Like what tearing forces, you know, they think it happens in the workout itself.
And therefore they're like, Oh well, you know, all this muscle damage is present immediately post
workout and that then gets repaired and like this hasn't even happened yet.
You know, like there's an idea going around at the moment the muscle damage repair happens before
hypertram.
Like that's categorically false and physiologically impossible because the damage you're describing
hasn't happened.
What damage?
Yeah.
What damage?
There's no damage to actually repair yet.
So that Oh no, no, no, it's all happened in the 1st 24 hours.
No, it hasn't happened by that point.
It's happening over the course of the back half of that day.
So you're starting to get damage happening maybe sort of in the first few hours post workout, but
the inflammation response is really going to be the major driver of that damage and it's going to be
the back end of that day.
So yeah, at the start of the 2nd 24 hour period, the second day post workout, that's when all your
damage repair is really happening.
You're repairing the myofibrils, the area.
Again, when people look at non exercise muscle injury like contusions and things like that, this
behaves completely differently from exercise induced damage because when we look at the Myop's
rates, they go down in that first day.
We're like, no, that's because that's when the damage is really happening.
You only get the Myop state elevation when you're repairing the structures.
Replacing actually is a better word because it's not repairing, it's replacing, Replacing the
structures that you've cleared away and the clearing away is happening in that first day.
That's why Myop's goes down, because you're not actually doing any repair or replacement.
It happens on the second day.
Actually it's identical to what happens during exercise induced muscle injury.
It's just that your hypertrophy stimulus is happening in that first day while your muscle damage is
not doing that and you've got these kind of things moving in opposite directions.
So you don't see that deficit to myopsy in the first day when you've got non exercise muscle injury.
So sorry, when you've got exercise induced muscle damage because you've also got hypertrophy
happening at the same time.
When you've got non exercise induced muscle injury, you do see it because obviously you've got no
hypertrophy happening simultaneously anyway.
So as I was saying, fatigue is obviously going to start happening, the muscle damage processes are
going to start happening in that post workout period.
So if you do a upper upper session, if you do an upper workout in the morning and you leave a couple
of hours, then when you come back to do your lower session, you're kind of still in the same session
as far as CNFT is concerned.
Your Physiology is determining that as basically the same workout with a really long rest period,
you know, so, but if you were to then push it a bit further and you get into the point where your
inflammatory responses are starting to rise to create that muscle damage that we need to do to clear
away all of the protease induced damage, then what you're going to see is that you're now in the
true post workout period and you're now subject to post workout CNFT.
So really what it comes down to is how long is that rest period between the morning session and the
afternoon session?
If you put them really far apart, like if somebody says, well, I work a professional job, I need to
be doing my workout in the morning and then I need to come back in the evening.
I'm like, that's basically second day from a physiological point of view because you're into that
territory now where muscle damage is creating your supraspinal CNS fatigue.
So honestly, you'd be better if you, if that's your limitation, which it will be for most of my
listeners, I imagine if that's your limitation, then don't do same day, do sequential days, do upper
lower on sequential days and do if that's really what you want to do.
If you really need to split those sessions out, split them on sequential days and do upper lower
repeatedly, you know, six days or if you want to do this whole kind of every other day idea that's
been kind of going around full body, fine, I'm not going to go there.
But if you're kind of maybe some somebody who's able to work a flexible hours, you have control over
your own schedule.
Now that situation, you could potentially do an upper lower work, sorry, an upper body workout.
And then you could maybe just a couple of have lunch and then have your coffee, do a bit of work and
then do the next one.
Or you could do what you've described to me as a really interesting approach, which is do your upper
body workout and then just walk down the road, go to the supermarket, come back and do the other
half, which I think is fantastic.
I mean, obviously you have complete control over your own schedule, so you can do whatever you want
to do.
But if you.
Got the juice That's an important.
Part I didn't want to disclose things you told me about.
I mean, I don't know if you want people to know that you drink juice.
You see, I'm this is like respect people's privacy when they tell me things.
I'm very aware of that, very aware.
Now I do I've because I, I mix some stuff in with my juice and I've been getting a lot of questions
about exactly how I make my juice mix.
So it is definitely a hot topic.
Yeah, so I want to jump back to the moment because you you said if, and actually an interesting
point is Clancy does actually say that that sort of upper morning and then low in the afternoon that
the limitation there is going to be someone's schedule.
And that if you if you don't have control over your schedule, it's not going to work.
So while he doesn't specifically say how many hours he's leaving between it, it is obviously that,
you know, point that he's making.
So I'm, I'm assuming he's probably not leaving 12 hours between it based on that statement, but I'm
not sure.
So you said that you know if it is 12 hours, you can only do 7:00 AM, 7:00 PM or whatever.
You've insinuated that it will be better to actually give yourself that full 24 hours then instead
of just that 12 hours.
Absolutely, because you're you're now inside that period of time where the muscle damage is
happening very rapidly.
You're you've got a full on Cal pain, a damage process happening.
You've also got the inflammation kicking off creating a problem and that's going to then lead to the
Super spinal CNST you're trying to avoid.
So I think, yeah, if somebody say, well look, no, I have to do 7:00 and 7:00, that's the only period
of time, times of the day that will work for me, I will then just don't just do 7 every day.
Pick one morning or evening and just go every day and don't do that.
Don't feel that you have to do them same day because it's not actually going to benefit you.
The benefit comes if you can keep those two workouts much closer together, you know, several hours
apart.
I'm not, I'm not comfortable giving super kind of sort of definitive numbers.
You know, I think if you're around the three or 4 hour mark, probably OK pushing it much further
than that.
I think you're going to start to find that you're starting to get into territory where that super
spinal fatigue is developing.
Now I want to ask what feels like a very obvious question, but I want it to be maybe laid out.
So obviously an upper lower split repeated for four sessions in total throughout the week is a very
common split.
It's one that I use with some of my clients.
It's one that you know, it's probably the most common after full body would be my guess.
Now the limitation with upper lower, upper, lower, upper lower, 6 sessions per week, as you pointed
out, the limitation is the post workout CNS fatigue, which is driven by the muscle damage.
Now muscle damage is obviously muscle specific.
So the more volume that that muscle is doing in a session, the more damage is going to experience,
right?
So if we're splitting sessions across 6 sessions instead of 4, then logically, logically, upper
lower upper lower upper lower 6 sessions must be having less post workout CNS fatigue than the four
sessions will.
Because in the four upper lower, upper lower, two of those sessions is still followed by previously
done, you know, session the day before.
Exactly.
This is one of the biggest problems that we rarely talk about with traditional upper lower splits
done with four workouts per week, say for example, the classic Monday, Tuesday, Thursday, Friday.
The biggest problem with that is that when people look at those, they go, oh, well, you know, I can
recover from Monday to Thursday doing say 5-4 or five sets per muscle group per workout.
And that's totally true on a muscle level.
But if you do a bunch of like sort of upper body workout, upper body exercises on Monday and you do
four or five sets of those, you are toast as far as supraspinal fatigue is concerned on Tuesday.
Because that muscle damage that you're now carrying around with you is going to create a supraspinal
fatigue problem on that Tuesday for your lower body workout.
And the same thing is going to happen on Thursday and Friday.
So really it's kind of like your Monday and your Thursday workouts are OK, but you know, a lot.
I mean, again, Monday is probably definitely OK, but Thursday is kind of borderline because if you
don't five sets on Tuesday, there's not really a chance you're going to be recovered by Thursday.
So really your Monday workout is the only one that gets away completely free of any post workout CNS
fatigue.
So yeah, it does look like six days a week upper lower with less session volume would be better than
doing that over 4 sessions.
But you know, it is, it is the difficult thing to really be precise about because as I say, we can
get a relatively good picture of what post workout recovery looks like on a muscle by muscle basis
because you literally just measure the fatigue and fatigue is the observable external reduction in
in excise performance.
So you literally just measure strength, that's really easy to do and there's tons of data about
that.
We've got really nice dose response profile for session volume, sorry, muscle session volume versus
post workout fatigue recovery time.
What we don't have is the same graph for superspinal CNS fatigue.
Now it looks like it tracks it relatively closely.
So I don't want to make this out to be like, oh, well, we don't know.
We have a reasonable idea.
It's just we don't have the same perfect dose response graph that we do for post workout fatigue
recovery, if that makes sense.
So yes, it does look like splitting your entire weeks worth of upper lower over six days would be
better than doing it over 4 days.
It does look like that.
But again, I'm just kind of introducing an element of caution there to say, look, we've got really
great data on how post workout fatigue relates to muscle training volume for a particular workout.
Yes, we've got that really clear.
I've done the the graph, people have seen it before.
We don't have the same level of confidence regarding how superspinal CSD works.
I think it works the same way.
I'd expect it to work the same way.
It does look like it works the same way, but I just don't have that data.
Either way, there's not an argument for how upper lower done four times per week could be superior
to done 6 times per week if you were splitting the volume.
Well, exactly, exactly, exactly.
So what we're saying is that if you're doing that smaller amount of muscle volume across six days
rather than four days, then you are going to end up with less interference between sequential days.
Yeah, it's really, yeah, I think that's, it's an interesting point because people don't people, my
perspective on it is people often think about, oh, you know, 6 sessions a week, but they're not
thinking about actually dividing those four sessions worth of volume across the six sessions.
And like you've just said there, well, if we do do that, then obviously there's going to be less.
I mean, strictly, what we're doing is dividing our full body three times a week across 6 sessions.
I mean, yes.
So it's kind of a little bit different because you are starting from a different numerical point
because you've started with your 3 full bodies rather than your two upper, lower split routines.
But yeah, I mean, I can see where you might end up in this.
It'd be interesting just to do that and see whether ends up in the same numbers.
I don't think it be miles apart, but I think it probably would be a little bit different.
So where does it leave us?
So if someones wanting to, if someones I guess getting into this and asking well what should I do?
Should I be doing body and, and doing my 1520 exercises or sets in in one workout and doing that
every other day or doing that Monday, Wednesday, Friday?
Or should I be doing my up in the morning and lower in the evening?
Or should I do up low up lower 4/6 times a week?
Do we have, I know you've talked about how you can test kind of, you know, which might be more
suited to you.
Is that sort of the starting point?
Is there any any other things you think people should be thinking about or considering?
So I think it's a journey.
So you you test something, you start with something and then you move forwards on the basis of what
you've learnt.
I mean, I know this sounds radical because I think people want the answers before they even start
these days and might just just try something that is sensible and see what happens.
So I would always, always, always just start with a traditional three day a week full body program.
Now, if you find having started that, that you are losing repetitions towards the end of your
workout, you're noticing A cardiovascular set of sensations, You feel like your final exercises of
the workout are losing repetitions.
Maybe you then test that by the hamstring curl exercise example I gave earlier, moving that from one
end of the workout to the other, seeing what happens.
Again, assuming you're not doing any other hamstrings exercises in that in that routine and you
notice that yes, you are losing a repetition.
So what we've got here, 2 steps.
First start, second notice maybe that a cardiovascular system is an issue for you.
Now at this point, what you could do, having noticed those things, what you could do is either you
could say, well, I'm going to make an adjustment to my training program.
I'm going to split the routine, or you could make a.
And actually, that's not a binary choice to be honest, but let me just go down that route first.
So you could decide to make an adjustment.
You could say, well, I'm going to split this out across 2 workouts in the day.
Now, if you have a flexible schedule and you can do that and you can take a short break and then
come back and do the other half, or a couple of hour break and do the other half perfect, no problem
at all.
Or you can move it to the following day.
Again, not a problem.
Now the reason I just caught myself and said this is not a binary choice is that the other thing you
could be doing is fixing your cardiovascular fitness.
Now that's you could just do that and you could just stick with the same full body program three
days a week and simultaneously start working on your cardiovascular fitness and that problem will
gradually go away.
Or you could make the fix.
And I don't think it's a fix fix.
I think it's just like an adjustment.
You could make the adjustment and you could split your workout into two halves and either do that
second-half a couple of hours later or on the second day at the same time as you're working on your
cardiovascular fitness.
And then in the future, when your cardiovascular fitness is, you know, sufficient, you could come
back and just go back to doing single workouts three days a week.
So I think there's a number of things here and it's it's like the exact route you take is going to
depend on your schedule and your circumstances and what you like to do.
I don't want to be in the gym six days a week.
I want to be in the gym three days a week.
That's because it's how my schedule works and how my preferences work.
And I'm not going to start training six days a week.
Even if my session volume feels like it was getting out of hand, I'm just not going to do that.
So everybody's having their own preferences.
So I think what I'm suggesting is that people just start with the three day a week full body and
then look at the problem and go, what do I think the problem is?
Most of the time if you're having a problem with three day a week, with session volumes being too
long, it's going to be a cardiovascular fitness problem.
I mean, that's really all it can be.
You can fix that with cardiovascular training.
You can fix it, adjust it to get around the problem to a certain degree by moving the session late
half the session later in the day as long as it's not too far away, or moving it to the following
day and doing upper lower repeatedly six days a week or even as I say, every other day if you want
to go down that route.
So I think there is a relatively straightforward algorithm if you like to moving forward with these
questions.
What the answer is not is asking influencers online what you should do.
That's not the answer.
So don't blow up my Instagram messages saying I think I should do this.
No, no, no, no, don't ask me what you should do.
It's like.
Yeah.
Or can I do this?
You know, do I have your permission to do this?
Yeah.
And the best we can do, best you can do, the best I can do is give people like what you've done
today is.
How it works?
Yeah, exactly.
Yeah, and how you can assess it for yourself.
Yeah, exactly.
Yeah, Now the risk of maybe doing what we just told, what we said we wouldn't do, I do want to give
a, a practical example of how I actually do this.
And I actually, I intend to do full body sessions.
That's that's my goal always.
And if, and this is the point you haven't necessarily brought up, but say I've got points in life
where maybe stress levels are higher, maybe I'm working longer hours, maybe there's things that are
contributing to my, my, I guess, perception of effort.
Then what I'll do in that full body session is I will then split it.
And so my intentions always, you know, Monday, Wednesday, Friday, full body or, or every other day
full body, I might get in the session and I might know, I just don't have the motivation here to
actually do my normal full body session, which is usually about 15 sets or so.
And so I'll just call it and I'll just do half of it.
I'll come back the next day like we've talked about, do the other half and then I'll go back to my
full body.
So I'll take a day off the next day and I'll go back full body day off, full body day off.
So for me, over, you know, a week or two weeks or whatever, I'm generally always getting that sort
of three times, you know, frequency per week.
But it might be over 4 sessions just because for whatever reason that day you know hasn't permitted
me to do that full body session.
Yeah.
I mean, that's, that's a perfect example of auto regulation.
And I think that's that's definitely something that is important to bear in mind.
So we're always watching what's happening, we're being observant and we're reacting to the
information that we're gathering, you know, but at the same time, we have a clear understanding of
what the Physiology is doing in the background.
So Physiology doesn't care about, you know, our life circumstances, it just does it's thing.
So we've just got to be aware that Physiology is doing it's thing.
We are observing and reacting and adjusting our plans according to what the Physiology is telling
us, but also according to what our circumstances dictate.
And we just do the best we can under the circumstances.
But as I say, you know, we know how to turn this into a reasonable starting point, which is three
days a week full body, which is what you just described.
And then we just move forwards from there according to our.
I think we've given people a lot to think about.
I think we're probably going to get a lot of questions on these sort of topics and questions we've
brought up.
Is there anything else you want to conclude with, or should we leave people there?
I think that's good for today.
I think we've covered the important issues and obviously whatever questions we get, we can use that
to move forward and do podcast on in the future.
And like we said, you know, the goal here is to give people, I guess, an understanding of the, the
foundational principles that will guide your decision making.
You know, we don't want to necessarily lock people into a box and say, well, it needs to look like
this.
You must work out this exact way and whatever else.
Like obviously there's nuance here and there's not so much nuance that it's like, well, you know,
you're different to this person, to this person.
We all have different Physiology, know the underlying Physiology is the same, but there's going to
be some degree of, you know, variance depending on that individual.
So hopefully there's stuff there for you guys to consider and assess and actually analyse how you
work and what works, you know, specifically for you understanding that that might even change over
time as well as you become more experienced or just stages in life or you know, hey, maybe you've
got a family and kids you've done at the same time to spent or whatever it might be.
But our hope, as always, is that this conversation is helpful for you guys in in moving forward.
So we hope you join us for another episode and we'll be back next week.