Episode: 004 Training splits and exercise selection - 3 sets of 1 exercise or 1 set of 3 exercises?
URL: https://open.spotify.com/episode/39SyKy6aF56KhSTi40VryH
Published: 2025-06-15
================================================================================

And welcome back to another episode of Hypertrophy, past and present.
Thank you guys for joining us again, if it's your first time joining us.
And welcome.
And today we have, as always, another topic we're gonna talk about, which I'm excited for.
I think this is gonna be, it's gonna connect into what we spoke about last week a little bit.
So if you haven't listened to last week's episode, make sure you do.
And we have a plan today to talk about which a lot of the time people ask you what my favorite
silver era plan is.
And if I'm honest, I think this might be it.
So I'm excited to jump into this one.
There's there's two, I'll be honest, there's two that I really love.
And a lot of the time I actually train by combining both of them.
And I'll, I'm sure I'll talk about that sometime.
But this is one of the definite highlights for me.
Chris, welcome anything you want to jump in and say.
No, I'm also excited to talk about this routine.
As you say, it links wonderfully with the topic we covered last time because it's an absolute
monster.
Have a workout plan.
And I think a lot of people might want to split it out over 2 days, which is what we talked about
last time.
But yeah, let's, let's jump in and, and describe it.
Try and get get our hands around it because it's, it's a lot of, it's a lot of exercises.
It's a big one.
You guys might just sit down and and really focus on this one.
And so it comes from Steve Reeves.
I'm sure most of you will have heard of Steve say obviously early Mr. Mr. Universe winner, and this
was published in the early 50s.
Now what I like about this, I explained this in our first episode that for me, I feel with
everything I've seen, I feel fairly confident that up until about 1954, at least in American
bodybuilding, I don't think there's any really significant usage of anabolics going on.
So anything before that year in 1954 I'm pretty confident with and this was published before 1954.
So this to me seems like a good silver era, pre steroid era plan.
And again, take a seat because it's a big one.
The way that Steve, I'll, I'll, I'll ease you guys into it.
The way that he outlined this, he talked about it was he it was full body and he trained each muscle
and for each muscle he did multiple exercises.
So he did three different exercises per muscle and he did one set of each exercise.
And so he started with his upper body and then he worked down to lower body and he just did one set
and he did repetitions of 8 to 12.
Now I, I actually think that's quite significant as well, 8:00 to 12:00 because obviously Steve is
competing at the same time as Dredge Park was.
And Dredge obviously popularized some of the lower repetition stuff.
You know Fives for example, he went down to twos for some exercises like bench and 8:00 to 12:00.
You might look at that and even today, you know when we talk about things like you know you're
stimulating reps model people might think why would you do 8 to 12.
Now for me, if I'm doing a full body program like this and you're doing one set for and a set of
eight to 10 or 12, it requires a lot less warming up generally than if you're doing a set of five.
So if.
But the interesting thing is and this again ties in with what we were talking about last time is
that if you are working in that high Rep range, you're going to find that you're creating a lot more
metabolite accumulation.
Your lactate, it's going to be there.
You're going to find you're depending so much more on your cardiovascular system.
So everything we talked about last time in terms of the the limitations of putting a full body work
out together, if you want to do a lot of exercises or a lot of sets across the whole body in one
session, you are going to find cardiovascular, you know, capacity is the limitation.
Well, if you're doing sets of 812, you can double that again.
I mean you're going to find it's even more problematic.
So again, really, really interesting, you know, connecting these dots here.
Yeah, yeah.
And you know, it's something a lot of these people state, and I think Steve even stated this in this
particular workout, is that there was this understanding that some people just did better with lower
repetitions and some did better with slightly higher repetitions.
And, you know, often they're sort of talking that sort of, you know, 5 to 12 Rep kind of range.
And, and I do wonder if it's, you know, what you're saying there.
Just some people had better cardiovascular sort of fitness and so they're better suited to the
higher repetitions potentially.
Anyway, I feel like I'm teasing you guys.
So the the workout planet started with the shoulders and he did one set of seated behind the neck
barbell press.
He went into a standing dumbbell latcher raise and then into a seated dumbbell front raise Did so
that was it for his shoulder work, one set of each.
He then moved into chest.
So he did a wide grip barbell bench into an incline dumbbell press, into a decline dumbbell fly,
then into back.
We did a set of bent over barbell grow with a coronated grip, a bent over one arm dumbbell grow.
So like a, a neutral grip and then a flat barbell pullover where he then went into biceps where he
did standing barbell curl, incline curls with dumbbells and then a seated dumbbell concentration
curl.
And then triceps where he did a seated overhead dumbbell triceps extension with a single arm and
then incline triceps skull crusher and then a standing triceps cable pressed down using a bar.
And then he did his lower body work.
Now I will mention he was pull.
He was resting 2 minutes between each set and he was resting 4 minutes between each muscle.
So that's an interesting note as well, especially in the context of the the cardiovascular demand.
So if it was he did a barbell squat with a with flat feet.
He then did a barbell box squat and then he did a, a hat squat, now a barbell hat squat.
So you, some of you may not be familiar with this where you're kind of standing with it's, it's
almost like a combination of a deadlift squat almost where you got a barbell behind your back so
it's not on your shoulders.
So that was his, his third quad exercise.
And then for hands and glues, he did a stiff leg deadlift, A seated barbell good morning, and then a
horizontal back extension.
And then for calves, he did a bent knee calf phrase.
He explained that he did this on the leg press, so I'm not sure this was bent knee or for this
straight leg.
And then he did a seated calf raise, which would have been bent leg.
And then he did a standing calf raise, single leg at a time.
And he did finish again what I called last week.
And some of the more fluffy type exercises he finished with two.
He did a sit ups, crunches and hanging knee raises for ABS and he did a little neck sort of super
steady thing where he did assisted neck sort of push ups and push downs and side to side.
We had a a workout partner providing resistance for his neck.
So I don't know how long that workout took him.
We could crunch some numbers quickly I'm sure.
But what is that?
So 2426 exercises with the ABS in the neck, 2 minutes between each.
So that's what about an hour and 10 if you take your grace periods in the work time and then 4
minutes between each muscle, 8 muscles.
So look, that's at least an hour and 45 minutes.
Chris, what do you what do you make of all that?
It's, it's crazy, isn't it?
I mean, it's, it's absolutely mad.
You know, I think, I think most people today would be, you know, really struggling to make that
work.
I think there's, let me just run through a couple of quick observations that I made as you were
going through just because they're in my mind at the moment.
They may not be in any particularly useful order, but these are the kind of observations I made
going through from the beginning.
He started with shoulders and the front raise.
The front raise is not actually a, a dealt exercise.
It's actually a kind of clavicular PEC exercise where the, the anterior dope helps.
So, you know, again, there's some interesting exercise selection there.
And that obviously wasn't, you know, kind of noticed or observed that it wasn't doing what what he
thought it was doing.
On on to the, the, the, the pressing, it's interesting that they're using a wide grip bench.
You know, I think that's, that's one of those things that I think has sort of fallen out of favour
with because powerlifting has tended to use a, a narrower grip, people have tended to start adopting
those type of benching techniques.
The reality is that when you move from transverse plane to size to plane, it completely changes
which part of the PEC's are being used.
Using a wide grip bench, you're definitely using all three parts of the PEC, probably focusing
mostly on the middle.
If you bring it into the narrow grip, you're doing what most people think you're doing.
When you use an incline press, most people you are using incline press for clavicular PEC.
I'm like honestly, you could just use narrow grip and it would be a lot better and more effective
for targeting the region you think you're going to, you're trying to target.
So again, it's interesting that they have got that wide grip in there.
It's a very telling point.
That was quite a popular exercise at that point as well.
A lot of you know, Ridge Park is big and wide grip, you know, definitely a popular variation.
In terms of the the back exercises, again, I repeat myself, but I'm always surprised when I don't
see a wide grip pull up or pull down.
You know, because here we've got a the pronated grip bent over row, which I assume is a relatively
wide grip, therefore transverse plane.
So actually not a lot exercise at all.
But then obviously the narrow, the bent over one arm row is almost certainly going to be sagittal
plane.
So that's kind of the sagittal there pullover is obviously size to a plane.
So I'm not really seeing frontal plane work.
And if you look at the moment arms and the activation data, which incidentally, I, I just did a, an
infographic series on Friday, you can see that the, the frontal plane is actually a better choice.
If if you were just going to pick one plane to work the lats in, you would go front to plane because
they have way better leverage.
Both regions upper and lower have way better leverage in that plane and you're going to get
therefore more involvement of those muscles size tool.
You've got smaller momentums in general and the the lower lats don't really have any meaningful
leverage to speak of.
So you're kind of seeing the sized plane is very much an upper lat focused exercise.
Frontal is obviously more lower, but you know, you do kind of get a big chunk of both.
So I'm always surprised when I don't see a front plane exercise in there, you know, because it just
feels like they're really leaving some stimulus on the table.
I think if you look at Steve's physique I don't think you would say his latter his most developed
part, to be fair.
It'll be interesting when we do look at some of the bodybuilders who could have more developed lads,
what we see them doing.
Definitely, definitely.
I didn't really have a lot to say about the the arms work except I think I think one of the triceps
exercises is listed here as being done supinated.
And I just wondered whether that was meaningful because there is there is some activation data
suggesting for some unknown reason that supination in triceps work does seem to create a little bit
of an increase effect.
So again, you know, maybe it's nothing, maybe it's coincidence, but again.
They did commonly do that.
They did do the the especially the skull crusher type exercise.
I mean, they actually called it.
I think they call it a triceps curl instead of a biceps curl.
OK, because that makes sense then, because they're literally just mirroring the exercise, aren't
they in that case?
And so they are doing that with the supinated grip, but that was that seems to be the more common
way that they were performing it.
Because it's one of those things that there's just a little bit of activation data suggesting that
there might be a benefit to doing that.
I don't have any other information really to sit with that and, and kind of build a picture.
But always when, when we see things being done by bodybuilders pre anabolics, then it's kind of like
there's a high probability that they were noticing something meaningful, You know, whereas today you
could just say, well, there's no possibility of noticing whether what you're doing is working.
It's just like everything is growing and it's like, well, is that because the exercise selection or
is that just because I've changed something in my stack?
So I think those are the kind of interesting coincidences where you can't say, well, actually, no,
it may be meaningful when somebody has chosen that particular exercise.
And then really it's just interesting to note that now here in this pro, in this program, in this
workout plan, we've got stiff leg deadlift.
So in past podcasts, I've pointed out that there is a lack of deadlift variations in some of the
early programs.
And I always felt that was strange because it's like it's not difficult to set up a deadlift
variation, you know, and even use blocks and other, you know, kind of means of changing the the
heights and those kind of things.
So you've got a lot of flexibility over deadlift variations and it's not an equipment intensive
exercise.
So it's nice to see that here.
But again, you know, there's a back extension, which is also very interesting.
So, you know, one of the issues with deadlift variations is that, you know, you kind of have this
necessity for quadriceps activation just to stand up.
And so there's that potential for inhibition of the hamstrings and the electromagnetist tends to
take over.
So if you've got a back extension, you don't have that.
And so you've got that, you know, kind of possibility.
But the fact that it's horizontal is even more interesting because that's really the first kind of
incidence really.
Well, arguably you can kind of find glute work earlier than this.
You know, this from the programs we've talked about.
I think this is kind of the first real glute specific exercise that we've we've got.
So those are just my random observations from listening to you walk through the program.
You know, it's always just fascinating to trace through from, you know, kind of planned plan, what's
changing, what's different.
This is one of the latest really, this is kind of like the very most advanced latest.
I, I, you know, I, I'm not a historian of, of, of this like you are.
I'm a little bit skeptical that there was no anabolic usage prior to 1954.
I think there's probably definitely a little bit going on because obviously it did kind of come out
in the in the 40s.
But you know, I think, you know, as you say, probably not widespread.
So you know.
Not only would it not have been the efficacy if it were being used would have been very low and the
doses that you would have needed to get any benefit would have caused severe liver toxicity at that
at that point what they were using.
One thing I'm interested here, a seated barbell.
Good morning.
What utility are you seeing in in that exercise?
So again, issue with.
So obviously, the good Morning is programmed for the hamstrings primarily.
Really the issue with any of these standing exercises is the problem that I mentioned a moment ago,
which is that as soon as you put quadriceps activation into play, the hamster can start to go well,
maybe we shouldn't be used as the primary hip extensor in this situation because we're going to
create a knee flexion force and the quadriceps are trying to create a knee extension force, and that
then is inefficient.
And that's the whole idea behind this 2 joint muscle problem.
So maybe the seated variation is a way of taking that quadricep activation down a notch.
I don't know.
You know, that would be 1 possible scenario or one possible explanation of why that is chosen.
It could be I mean, the other thing that I think overall as a program, I mean, I've already
mentioned, I think it's, it's it's a bit mad in terms of the the just the kind of the workout
volume.
I, I certainly would never have done this even, you know, at my fittest, you know, kind of 1520
years ago now, but I would probably have to divide this in two.
But even though you're talking about doing sets of, you know, 8 to 12, So you're kind of limiting
how much you're, you're putting on the barbell.
I can't really imagine doing all of that upper body workout and then loading the barbell up to these
squats.
I just can't visualize doing that.
I honestly couldn't do that.
I would have to do a leg press or something that didn't involve me, you know, kind of warming up to
do a set because even even 8 reps, 8 to 12 repetitions, I'm going to have so much on the bar at that
point that it's going to take me 15 minutes to warm up, you know, and I've just done like what looks
like a brutal upper body workout before that.
So I think it's, it's really interesting just to put ourselves in the shoes of these guys and go,
this was, this was a mission.
This was this was seriously hard work and like your quick arithmetic earlier is like over an hour
and a half of of of you know, relatively short risk periods.
I think this the cardiovascular capacity of these guys was doing very, very high and they must have
got to this point over a period of years I think or at least had a history of other physical
activity that permitted them to do this.
So I don't think it's again, I think this is a really nice continuance when we talked about last
time, which is that, you know, cardiovascular capacity really does limit how much your full body
sessions can be.
But again, even with that in mind, loading barbells up to do lower body work after an entire upper
body workout is is challenging mentally I think.
So what I love about this plan personally is what it seems to me like he's doing is trying to pick
as many exercises or I guess maybe as few exercises as in needed for that muscle to to really
stimulate as much of that muscle as possible.
Right.
And I think with what we have available to us today with machines and with cables, we could do that
using a lot more, you know, single joint exercises.
We could do it with a lot less need to load barbells.
We could do it, you know, a lot more conveniently and we could select exercises that are using less
load.
And so that again, you know, less warming up.
It'll just be easy to set it up.
So I think there's, there's that potential to modify it.
And then the second thing I think is some of the like he's obviously had a system he was following,
you know, three exercises per muscle.
OK, it's neat.
I get that.
But I do think if we look at it, there's some exercises that aren't necessarily needed.
You know, we look at the, the calf stuff and, and there's two exercises there that are doing very
similar things.
You know, we look at, you know, arguably even the quads, they're all squat patterns.
You know, arguably there's a bit of overlap there.
So I think for me looking at it, we could probably condense it down largely to maybe 2 exercises per
muscle using machines, using cables.
And that, to me, seems like a feasible plan that people who have a decent cardiovascular fitness
could follow today.
Oh, absolutely.
And that's a great point.
You know, I think this this idea of, you know, instead of saying let's do three sets of, you know,
one exercise, you know, do sort of one set of three exercises or two sets of two exercises or
whatever.
You know, I think those those are really interesting kind of concepts.
And again, your two points that you made, I totally agree with.
I mean, like if you were to go through this and replace, you know, everything that you can with a
machine exercise.
And so, well, I've got this size to play in row.
I've got, you know, wide grip row I can do on the same machine.
And I've got a lat pull down right next to it, you know, and I've got, you know, sort of a chess fly
that I can immediately switch around and then do a reverse, you know, peg deck of a rear adult fly
on that same machine.
You know, I think again, suddenly you're changing the, the, the, the, the situation completely.
So yeah, I agree.
I mean, I think the, the machine access changes everything in terms of the difficulty of sort of
setting things up and a big chunk of the cardiovascular as well.
You know, as I say with the leg press versus the squat.
And then as you say, there's, there's so much redundancy in here.
I mean, like the calves is a great example.
It's like, what are you doing?
I mean, like, why do you do 2 totally different, you know, sort of calf raise exercises with that
with an extended knee?
Or you go to that point and he's like, well, obviously I'm doing this to every other.
That's why exactly.
That's the point.
It's like, because I've got my system working with three of three of three, it's like I have to do
that.
Well, not really, but yeah, I think if you were to sort of really condense this down to say 16
exercises instead of 24, move everything across the machines and now you're doing, you know, a
single set of a single set on 16 exercises, then yeah, absolutely.
Is that is definitely doable.
You know, I think that's, I mean, that's, as you pointed out when we were talking before, you know,
if you start thinking about that in terms of like, well, could you do, you know, 5 exercises for
three sets each?
Well, for me, that's toppy.
That's, that's absolutely my top end.
But yeah, you could.
And so, yeah, you can do 15 exercises, 16 exercises for one set each.
Yeah, that starts to make a lot more sense.
It's, it's a really cool way of, as you say, having that sort of exercise variety to make sure
you've got all of the muscle, not just, you know, the bits that are necessary for the joint actions
that you're training in the exercise that you've selected.
Yeah.
And what you said there, that's, that's basically exactly how I use this.
This type of plan that I did myself is I do about 1516 exercises, one set of each.
And I, I tend to condense it down to essentially 2 exercises per muscle, but I tend to have one of
those exercises often we'll also train another muscle.
So you tend to still get that two to three sets per muscle anyway.
And obviously, like we spoke about last week, another alternative would actually just be splitting
this up and you could just take the work out as is and say, OK, I'm going to do half of it in the
morning.
I'm going to half of it in the afternoon.
And if, if you aren't familiar with that, we, we did do a whole podcast episode, episode 2 on that.
So go back and listen to that.
Now, I don't know if you want to segue into this, but one, one thing I do want to know here,
obviously these are single sets and there is a difference because people talk about single set
systems a lot online.
It's, it's got not a lot of attention lately and there's a lot of criticism around single sets and,
you know, people saying, oh, single sets are nowhere as effective as multiple sets and, you know,
people shouldn't be doing single sets or whatever.
And I think that this is this sort of, I guess, overlooking of this single sets per muscle.
But then there's single sets per exercise and a system like this is using single sets per exercise,
but he's not doing single sets per muscle, is he?
He's doing three sets per muscle.
And so a lot of that criticism where people saying don't do single sets or sets are less effective
than multi sets, well, obviously we're talking about per muscle.
And that's, that just doesn't feel like a fair criticism against a workout plan like this.
So I just wanted to differentiate that because that's a rhetoric that we're seeing a lot online at
the moment.
Yeah.
And Even so, even though, you know, even though it's true that multiple sets will produce more
growth than single sets, the incremental difference is not proportional to the number of sets.
I mean, you don't, you don't get double the hypertrophy by doing 2 sets compared to 1 set.
I mean, it's absolutely nowhere near that.
I mean, it's probably something like another sort of 40% on top of what you've done.
You know, the first, the second set is probably about 40% as stimulating as the, as the first or
maybe depending on the dose response model you want to use.
But it's certainly not, you know, kind of saying that, oh, I'm doing 2 sets, therefore I've got
twice the hypertrophy is nowhere near that, you know, and it carries on getting worse.
And by the time you're up to 345 or certainly 456 sets, I mean the increments are so tiny that you
kind of just saying, well, I'm creating all of this post workout T, which is going to cause me
problems in my recovery and also affect other workouts that I might want to do later in the week.
So, you know, I think there's that misunderstanding of what how much stimulus we can get or how much
extra stimulus we can get from those multiple set protocols.
Now, is there anything else you want to comment on this program or should we move on and jump into
our next topic?
I think we can segue naturally actually from the last point that you made, which is this idea of
having multiple exercises for a muscle group.
So one of the questions I see a lot is, is it better to do, you know, just just to kind of phrase
the question in a common way, I mean, or not, this is kind of just the way that it's often phrased.
Would it be better to do 1 exercise and then do three sets of that exercise?
Or would it be better to do, you know, sort of three separate exercises for more or less the same
muscle group and do one set, you know, on each of those exercises?
So it's like, you know, 11 set each of three exercises or one exercise for three sets.
Now, basically what we have to start with is the understanding that hypertrophy and also atrophy are
muscle fiber specific.
Now, if I literally just said that and nothing else for the rest of my time in the fitness industry,
it would be worth it.
Would be worth it because it's the single thing that everybody else gets wrong and not everybody
else.
But like, you know, the vast majority of the fitness industry talk about training muscles and you
can't do that.
There's no such thing as training a muscle.
You can only train muscle fibers.
You, you train some of the muscle fibers in a muscle and the other muscle fibers, if they're not
trained, they just won't even know that it happened.
So it's very, very important and people really, really struggle with this, not just, you know, like
as a concept, like some people were literally outright rejected to go, Oh no, we think that if
you're training one part of the muscle, the other part magically gets a stimulus.
Most of Physiology just doesn't work like that.
But even with people who don't reject it out of hand, you still people, you still see people
programming as if it's not.
And that's the really interesting thing.
Because what you're seeing there is that their mental model, which maybe they don't even know what
it is, but their mental model of how hypertroid works is not the model that they would derive if
they, they worked through the Physiology step by step.
And ultimately that's, that's the only difference between what I'm doing and what a lot of other
people are doing is that I'm trying to start with the Physiology and say, if this Physiology is
true, which we think it is, then what does that then mean for programming implications?
You know, I'm not just kind of, you know, kind of programming the way I want to and then trying to
make that fit with Physiology that we know.
So ultimately, you know, if we accept that hypertrophy and atrophy are both fibre specific, then we
look at different exercises and we've got this principle of neural mechanical matching which tells
us that the brain or the central nervous system to be more accurate, actually sends some traumatic
command to the places that are going to be most efficient for doing the movement.
And So what you find is that different regions within a muscle, if there are, if a muscle has large
segmented regions, especially like for example, the lats, great example.
As I say, I posted on this on Friday.
So if you've got a muscle which has very clear reasons, you can easily see that there are
differences in leverage, which is what the principle of new mechanical matching uses to decide where
to send activation.
And you've got therefore differences in activation.
And so when we look at literature and we see differences in leverage and also differences in
activation that match those differences in leverage.
What I mean by that is if you look at the leverages for the lats, for example, you'll see that the
upper lat, a thoracic lat, has really good leverage for sagittal plane pulling narrow grip rows.
Narrow grip pull downs doesn't have quite so good leverage at all for frontal plane wide grip pull
downs, which is what I was talking about earlier.
Now in contrast, the lumbar middle or middle to lower lat is the opposite.
It has very much poorer leverage in the and surgical plane has great leverage in the frontal plane.
So then we look at activation data.
We see exactly the same thing happening.
We see that the upper region of the the laps, the the thoracic area tends to be more activated in
surgical plane pulling, whereas the lower region tends to be more activated or middle and lower
tends to be more activated in that frontal plane.
So you can see the two things are matching up.
Now what does that what does that mean?
What it means is that the the central nervous system is choosing the areas that have the best
leverage and therefore can produce the highest joint torques for the lowest levels of muscle
activation in order to accomplish the movement.
So what happens is you end up with a region being maximally activated.
For example, I do a wide grip pull down the lower part, middle and lower part lat is going to be
maximally activated.
The upper part will therefore be kind of delayed.
If you're going up in the size principle, it will be pushed higher and higher and higher up the the
ranking it'll go well.
We don't want that area to be activated.
So we'll kind of kick in later and Henneman size pins will basically sits inside of new kind of
commercial.
Some people really struggle with the way that those two things work together.
All you have to go is all you have to do is to say, well, the brain has a number of options or the
central nervous system has a number of options available to it to do a movement.
So you can say, well, OK, what it does is it chooses to start sending activation to the regions that
have the best leverage first.
And then what's going to happen is Hanemann size principle is followed inside that region, no
problem.
And then what it does, OK, well, now we've started to get to the point where that region is starting
to Max out, where we start using some of the other region.
And that's the point where things start to break down for people because they will go, OK, well, why
doesn't the brain just carry on, activate all of the upper region after it's activated, all the
lower region in that wide grip ulldown.
So I'm doing a wide grip ulldown.
My lower region of the lats has the best leverage, so the best highest activation.
And so the central nervous system starts to turn the activation to that area.
And then when it's done with that, why doesn't the central nervous system carry on and activate all
of the upper region as well?
Because it has some leverage.
So why doesn't it use all of that?
And that's the bit that catches people out, I think, when they start to think about how neuro
mechanical matching works, how exercise works, because they don't realize that the the brain
actually has a limit on how much central motor command it can create because of the maximum
tolerable protection of effort.
So if we're doing a movement, then we're going to have a what's called a voluntary activation
deficit.
We can't actually activate the entirety of the muscle won't let us do that because it's too painful.
The brain has a limit on how much central motor command it can generate because it has a perception
of effort that is generated every time we create a central motor command.
And so there's a deficit.
Where does that deficit happen in a wide grip pull down when it happens in the upper region, which
is the area that has the worst average.
So if you have a muscle with a voluntary activation deficit and every muscle bigger than the
although flex complex does, then what's going to happen is the area has the worst leverage out of
the options that you've got available will be the bit that actually has the biggest deficit and you
don't activate those fibers.
So I realized that was a very long explanation, but what I'm what that means in practice is that if
you are doing an exercise and one area of the muscle or one of the muscles involved has great
leverage and another has poor leverage, then the the muscle that has the poorer leverage or the
region of the muscle that has the poorer leverage will not have all of its muscle fibers activated.
That's just how this works.
That means that because those fibers are not activated, they are not trained because hypertrophy and
atrophy are both muscle fiber specific.
So ultimately that means that the area that you're doing in that particular exercise that has that
weak leverage is not being trained by that particular exercise.
So we are going to find that exercises have.
So if I look at the wide grid pull down versus the narrow grid row, again, if we have those two
exercises and we compare them, there's going to be a group of muscle fibers that are used in both
exercises.
And there's going to be a group muscle fibers that are unique to the wide grip pull down.
And there's going to be a group of multipliers that are unique to the sagittal plane, narrow grip
row or narrow grip pull down.
And that is just how this model is working.
There's a lot you covered there.
So I just want to highlight a couple of those things and maybe simplify them in case we've missed
anyone.
So you've explained there basically how, how our drain central nervous system is, is ultimately
going to decide which muscle to use, right?
And it's based on these leverages.
And this is essentially the the principle of neuromechanical matching.
Now what you said towards the end there, so you said that any muscle that's larger than the elbow
flexes, there's going to be a natural deficit there where we can't activate the entirety of that
muscle.
I think that's a really key thing because that's happening essentially the same thing that's causing
that to happen is why we're seeing this deficit in particular muscles and muscle regions in
particular exercises, right?
So what you've said in in that statement is we don't, we simply don't produce enough central motor
command to actually fully activate a muscle most of the time.
Exactly.
And I think that this comes back to another problem that a lot of people have in the in this space,
which is that they think that muscular failure is reached when essentially every single muscle fiber
has been activated.
And that's just not true.
There are voluntary activation deficits even in maximal effort, voluntary, maximal voluntary
isometric contractions, maximal efforts, we still see a deficit of activation compared to what could
be achieved theoretically or through testing.
So we know that that deficit exists.
Now why does that deficit exist?
Well, they exist because we don't reach failure when every single multiplier is activated.
We reach failure when we reach our maximum tolerable perception of effort.
It's the effort perception that stops us going any higher.
And so again, it's one of these areas where it's important to appreciate all of the key areas of
Physiology because they all impact on each other.
And this is a really really good example.
Of that, yeah, yeah.
So theoretically if there was a way that someone that one could continue to increase Central motor
command, then you have an exercise the lat pull down, frontal plane lat pull down.
So you're saying in that situation we could actually see if there were if central motor command was
not the limitation, OK, you could actually maximally activate both up and lower lats or up and
middle lats and that would sort of that would be it.
That would be the exercise to do everything for the whole lats.
But we're never going to get to that point because we had this limitation in available Central motor
command.
Exactly.
And the larger the muscle, the harder it is or the larger the muscle mass involved in the exercise
is probably a more accurate way of describing it.
So if you're doing an exercise and the central nervous system recognizes that you have all of these
possibilities and there's a lot of possibilities and a lot of muscle mass could be involved, now
you're going to have a bigger deficit.
So ultimately, the more muscle mass that can be involved, the more of a deficit you're going to
have.
And that again, that then ties into the excise selection choices that we might sort of go through
where we sort of maybe have to to make compromises with exercises that have more muscle mass like
presses and pulls and kind of squats and deadlifts compared with single joint stuff.
But basically, yeah, if you've got a lot of muscle mass being used or potentially could be used
because it all has leverage, then you can have a bigger deficit.
So the fact that someone can get, so you say you have a bilateral exercise and you perform it
unilaterally and you know that you can perform more than 50% of that load unilaterally because it's
more central motive command going to less muscle mass.
The fact that we know that that happens, that like that effectively settles the debate on on the
lats on whether you can maximally activate a muscle or whatever.
Like that tells us, because that happens, it tells us that there's always going to be a limitation
then.
Well, exactly.
I mean, it's not just the bilateral force deficit.
I mean, the bilateral force deficit I think is the very best proof of this.
And it's one of those wonderful things that people can literally just do in their own gym at home or
in in a facility to prove to themselves.
We talked about this many times over the years.
You can do a sort of a bilateral exercise and then put, if you're doing using two dumbbells, you put
one dumbbell down and generally you're going to get another Rep with the remaining limb that you're
still using.
There's a lot of examples like that, but bilateral force deficit is great.
Maximal voluntary contractions also show deficits and those deficits increase with increasing muscle
size.
So if you look at elbow flexors, the deficit's really tiny couple of percent.
Look at quads and glutes, you're looking at sort of 1520% deficit, which is enormous.
You can actually do a take a look at, there's a series of studies that have been done that also make
this point in a slightly different way, which is that essentially if you're doing a a fixed duration
of exercise, high intensity exercise, then you'll reach task failure at a certain point.
Now the amount of peripheral fatigue that you can generate at that point of task failure is a really
good proxy for how high your recruitment was when you reach task failure.
Because if your recruitment is really high, using a lot of fast reach fibers, you're generating out
the metabolites, you're going to see a lot of peripheral fatigue.
So you can literally, and I've actually sketched this out across the studies, There's three or four
studies that have been done and they've compared things like, you know, single limb versus 2 limb or
multi joint versus, you know, single joint or upper body exercise versus lower body.
And you just see that they've got different amounts of exercise, sorry, different amounts of muscle
mass in each of the two excise conditions.
And you can just literally draw a straight line across that the entire set of studies which shows
you that the more muscle mass you've got, the less peripheral fatigue you're going to see at
muscular failure.
So when you get to the really kind of single joint, single limb upper body exercise, then you
generate absolutely crazy amounts of metabolite related fatigue in the muscle.
So it's not just about, you know, oh look, we've got the bilateral force deficit.
Therefore we're going to extrapolate from that.
No, no, no, no, we're not doing that.
We're saying that you've got it in maximum voluntary contractions and it scales with muscle mass in
those situations from voluntary activation deficits recorded with interpolated twitch.
You've got the same thing happening in bilateral force deficit, and you've got the same thing
happening again in the fatigue literature where you start to track peripheral fatigue at task
failure with different amounts of muscle mass in the exercise.
So I'm kind of trying to belabor the point a little bit here to, to to sort of show that this is not
extrapolation from a single point in literature.
This is a collection of multiple different investigations with totally different methodologies that
all get to the same answer.
Go back to the plan that I introduced at the start of this episode where Steve was doing there was
he split into 88 muscles and he was doing 3 exercises, one set of each.
And the alternative to that would be say 8 muscles.
So one exercise of each and doing three sets of that one exercise.
So if the question was well, which is going to produce better results?
So which is going to be better for, you know, building, I guess the highest potential of of muscle
mass.
OK, not necessarily quickest whatever bit, but in a high sort of total potential then based off what
you're saying there, then obviously having multiple exercises at one set each, you said that there's
going to be some muscle fibers in each of those exercises where there's going to be overlap.
And so they're going to be getting a stimulus in each of those exercises potentially.
And then there's going to be some fibers where they're going to get a stimulus in potentially one of
those exercises and not in the other two.
So how would that play out in in practical terms, like if we have a bodybuilder who's doing this is
are you going to see notable difference?
Like what, what outcome would we see by having some fibers that are getting stimulus in one of these
exercises and none the others compared to in multiple sets of one exercise?
What's that even mean?
So essentially if we were to do a full body program and just pick one exercise for a muscle, like we
said earlier, if I was going to be forced to choose a single lat exercise, it would be a wide grip
pull down or wide grip pull up.
If you literally just do that for two or three sets every time you do your sort of training
sessions, then obviously the rate of growth will be, I would say pretty much as fast as you can
possibly make it in the muscle fibers that are being trained.
So you get very rapid growth in those muscle fibers, but it's almost impossible, if not impossible,
to train every single muscle fiber in the thoracic region using a wide grip, pull down or pull up.
So basically it's like you're just ignoring those muscle fibers forever.
They just never get touched.
And So what happens is you get a very rapid rate of growth, but you don't really maximize your
muscular potential.
That's how I would describe that.
In contrast, if you were to do say wide grip pull up and I'm just going to follow Steve Reeves kind
of format and use three different exercises.
I'm not saying this is the right 3.
So if you do wide group kind of pull up or pull down and then narrow row and then a pullover kind of
more or less what he has with a bit of a change there.
So you were to kind of focus on lats and you do 3 separate exercises.
What would happen is that you would get the same rate of growth for the muscle fibers that are
continuous across three exercises, which is however whatever percent, you know, 6070% whatever.
So you're getting that same rate.
So it's not going to be like the same as doing three sets of, you know, lap board outs, but it's
going to be approaching that point.
But then what's happened is you've now, so you've got three sets of that stimulus.
You've also now got one set stimulus on the muscle fibers that are not continuous across the three.
So essentially what you've then done is you've got your kind of sort of 70 or 80% sort of continuous
fibers, which are going to get that same sort of rate of growth.
But then on top of that, you've now got a slower rate of growth with one set per session, which is
actually still perfectly valid.
And it's going to be giving you a higher maximum muscular potential.
So it's a really, really different scenario that we're describing.
So what I would expect is that it would, it would basically lift the ceiling.
I mean, I'm not sure how much difference you would see in terms of rate of growth across the whole
lat.
I mean, it might be it's sort of similar ish, but you are definitively raising the ceiling on how
high you can go in terms of your muscular potential if you use a wider variety of exercise.
I mean, it's just basic neuro mechanical matching observations, you know, And I think I kind of, I
did make the point earlier, but let me just make it again because I think it's super important.
If we have an exercise which is training, for example, like the wide grip pull down is training
predominantly lower lat and some of them are fibers in the upper lat.
There will be fibers that are not activated in the upper lat.
And you can't train those, you can't grow them.
They're just.
Ignoring the stimulus and this then has really huge problematic implications for programs that don't
have a higher frequency.
So if we're looking at a full body split like we're talking about, then actually, you know, you
could either do it the way that Steve did it with three exercises in one session.
Or if you wanted to, you could do what we've talked about before, which is full body or AB split
where you have workout A and then maybe say Monday, Wednesday, Friday, you have workout A and then
workout B on Wednesday.
And then you go back to workout A on Friday.
Following week.
You start, we work out B on the Monday, so and then A on Wednesday and B on the Friday.
So you have ABA and then the following week Bab and you're just alternating between workouts.
And in that scenario, essentially you kind of end up with a sort of some muscle fibers get a
stimulus.
Say, for example, you're alternating wide grip pull downs and narrow grip rows.
A workout is wide grip pull down B workout is narrow gate row.
And you're just doing that instead of what we've been talking about.
In that scenario, you would have a sort of three times a week stimulus for the 70% fibers that are
continuous between the two regions and you'd have a 1 1/2 * a week stimulus for the fibers that were
not continuous.
So it's exactly the same concept.
You can make that work.
What you can't make work is if you now have only two upper sessions a week.
So if you're doing an upper lower split and you're doing 2 upper body workouts a week, you can't now
have those two separate exercises on different days and make it work.
What's going to happen is that you're only now training your continuous muscle fibers that are the
same activated in in the two different exercises.
So like as I say, maybe 78%, you train those in the in the wide grip, pull down the same fibers, get
trained in an aggregate row.
Anything on top of that that's trained uniquely in the two exercises just atrophies from 1:00 week
to the next because you're literally just doing one workout a week for those fibers.
And unless you're pushing five sets plus it's just toppy even in upper lower context, you're not
going to be able to make those fibers grow from week to week.
And I think ultimately that's that's where this exercise selection problem is being felt as a pain
point in the industry at the moment.
You know, we're making this observation about how new mechanical matching works, how muscle fibers
are activated, how hypertrophy is muscle fiber specific.
And we're pointing out that means you can't do AB formats in upper lower splits.
The only format that works for upper lower splits is a A You have to do the same exercises both
times.
You can't do a different exercise in different sessions.
It literally cannot possibly work physiologically, you know, maintenance.
It shows us that you have to do 3 or 4 more than three or four sets, so probably 5 sets for that set
of muscle fibers once a week.
So if your exercise is not training, you know, the same muscle fibers as your other chosen exercise,
which you can't possibly do, then you know you're going to have some fibers that you're training and
then just letting you know kind of atrophy, which seems like a tremendous waste of time and energy.
This is really important.
I want to just repeat some of this because I think if if people can take this away, I think it'll,
it'll change the way people program completely.
And it's something that I see and mistake people make all the time.
So we're talking, there's two splits.
You've got up there.
You've talked about full body AB and you've talked about upper lower done four times per week.
And I love full body AB.
So in fact, let's even take a step back for a moment.
The alternative to that would be full body ABC.
And so by that we just made a different workout plan each day, right?
I personally think full body ABC makes no sense.
I struggle to see a time where that is a worthwhile split to use.
I do not use it unless I say this.
If you understand bio mechanics well enough, you understand mechanical matching well enough.
You could select exercises that are going to have similar enough overlap where if you just wanted a
variety for the sake of variety.
It's so basically you just be kind of changing the machine or changing the kind of implement they
are using.
But fundamentally the bio mechanics behind that, it's the same exercise.
It's the same thing, just looks different on on a picture, yeah.
It looks different on paper and I use that technique with clients because it does some people find
it more motivating, right?
So some people might be listening to this and be like held up.
I've seen your plan and I've seen you do this.
Well, if you look at the exercise selection, that's what I'm doing.
It's.
Kind of like, yeah, it's a dumbbell curl or it's a barbell curl.
It's like it's the same thing.
Exactly, exactly.
So you've mentioned AB and so the benefit with this AB split is roughly what once every five days or
so the the exercise is getting trained.
So this is, this is a bit I want to go slow with.
So every five days is significantly different to every seven days.
So if we're doing an upper lower 4 sessions per week, you've got an upper body one day, you've got a
upper body 2 day, and they have different exercises on those two days.
Obviously it's seven days before that exercise is being trained again.
For people listening being like, hold up, why is AB so much better than an upper lower?
Why?
Why is five days and seven days?
Why are we saying that that's that's so important?
So basically if you're doing a single set of an exercise, so like we're still sticking with this
Steve Reeves idea of doing one set per exercise and doing a couple of different exercises for a
muscle route, then you have unique fibers that are only getting a single set of stimulus.
Basically, if you're doing AB, sorry, yeah, AB in the context of full body training.
So you're doing ABA and then Bab, then basically you're training on Monday and then you've got
Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday and Friday.
So yeah, four days or five days.
So it's four days if you're Monday to Friday, it's five days if you're Wednesday to Monday.
So alternating that's going to happen if you've got four days, then you are going to arrive at your
next session with some hypertrophy net of the atrophy from the one set that you did.
So you get from Monday to Friday and you've got some hypertrophy in hand.
If you go Wednesday to Monday, you actually kind of end up on maintenance exactly at that day.
So essentially what happens is you can literally just about make progress with that over time.
It's the it's the literal bare minimum I think that you can do to make work.
Now I really having said that, I really love that that program, you say full body AB is fantastic
for somebody who's already developed a large chunk of muscle mass, doesn't really have a lot of
capacity to move forward, but wants to maintain, you know, absolutely everything, absolutely
everything because the coverage you get with full body AB is insane.
You just literally do everything you want to do and there's just no demand on the system at all
because you've got your variety like a Steve Reeve type program, but you've split it out over 2
totally different workouts.
So you can bring things back to a handful of exercises, like 8 or 9 exercises, single sets, and
you're actually really well covered.
So yeah, basically what we're saying is that full body AB is going to allow you to either be on
maintenance between sessions or actually growth between sessions, which is the point.
If you push that further than five days, it starts to get to a very difficult point where you start
to lose that growth stimulus that you've previously established.
And so you end up at the next session without the hypertrophy that you've actually achieved.
So ultimately, pushing further than five days, five days is kind of where you're going to hit
maintenance with about one set.
Pushing further than five days, you end up in a scenario where you're losing everything that you've
made unless, as I say, you're doing 5 sets, four or five sets, you're going to find that you can do
that, but that is toppy volumes really.
And if you're trying to do a variety of exercises, you're not going to be able to do 5 sets.
And it's just so inefficient, like if you sit down and and because you're obviously you've talked
about how it can be hard to fit all these exercises in, right.
We've talked about 24 exercises in Steve's plan.
Maybe, maybe 4 exercises, five sets each.
Exactly like if you think about it if, because I my starting point with everyone is I say start by
thinking about all the exercises you need, right?
And then work out what split you're going to use.
If you only need 10 exercises to adequately train whatever you want to train, you can do that all in
one session.
I think you should repeat, I think you should repeat that for people because honestly, this is a key
element of the programming section of the mentorship course that I've been doing for years, which is
you start with the contents of the program.
You do not start with the split, you start with the contents of the program.
So you decide what So like I often teach athletic programming.
So I say decide what the athlete is going to need in terms of the exercises and the stimuli.
You've decided what those things need to be.
Having decided what those things need to be now arrange them in a split that works.
If you start with a split, like so many people ask me questions on Instagram, they're starting their
programming journey with I want to do this split.
I'm like, well, you've just now constrained the options that you've got available to you, and you
may find and your choices of exercise selection don't fit the split that you've already identified.
Start with the contents and then split it up.
I mean, that's kind of what split means, doesn't it?
It's like, what are you splitting?
If you haven't got something to split up, how are you even splitting it?
You're splitting nothing.
It doesn't exist.
It's like, honestly, this terminology tells you what the answer is before you can start.
You can't split something up that isn't there, you know?
So you start with the contents.
It's so important point.
You start with the things that you want to do and then you split them up.
Exactly, exactly.
And then figured I was going to that point.
But what I do want to say with that is, yes, start with all the exercises you decide you need.
Then decide whether that's too many to do in one session or not.
If it's too many, do AB, however you want to do that, do up below in the morning, evening, whatever.
And then what I would say is if that session has more cardiovascular capacity, if you feel like you
got more time or whatever in that session, you can add another set, right?
You can do a second set of third set, whatever.
So that ultimately, I think is a foundation power.
Someone should be starting and that's what I wanted to say in terms of efficiency.
So if you've got the, the, let's say, 15 exercises you want to do, you can get that stimulus, like
you said, as long as an exercise is being trained by one set every four to five days, we're going to
see enough overtime that you're going to build.
But suddenly you do this once a week, you now need to jam realistically probably 5 sets into that.
So if you're now looking at your weekly volume just in terms of work you need to get done to get
anywhere to move forward, you now need to use a hell of a lot more work just to grow muscle than if
you just use a different split where you're actually using that exercise every four to five days
instead.
It just like for me when I when I run out plans, I just can't justify doing that.
It's like I'm I'm wasting so many sets just to make up my mistake of not doing that exercise a
couple days earlier.
It just doesn't make sense.
No, it doesn't doesn't make any sense at all.
And I think, you know, it's so cool that we have this, this documentation of how silver era
bodybuilders were doing this.
You know, they, they identified this problem, they fixed this problem.
They didn't have the confusing, confounding effect of anabolics making it almost impossible to tell
whether what they were doing was working or not.
And and so they came to the the same conclusions.
You know, and I just every time we talk about this stuff, it's such a great reminder that the
Physiology which allows us to derive essentially the same answers is so, so continuous with what
these guys were doing.
You know, the only reason that the fitness industry is running around with ideas that are completely
opposing to this is because of anabolics.
Anabolics came in and now suddenly nobody knows how to train anymore because you've got a stimulus
which creates probably, you know, at least as much growth as a beginner would get and probably
substantially more than the advanced trainer can get from strength training.
So it just completely obliterates any ability to perceive what's happening.
But, you know, if we return to Physiology, we get a model that tells us how training should work.
And then you kind of end up in this exact same place as these guys got to through trial and error.
It's, it's just such an amazing, you know, kind of confluence of observations.
I want to make one more point about the splits and then I'll stop going on about it.
But I do think this is such an important point for people to get.
And in terms of the upper lower, I think this, I still use upper lower splits, but I think people
often think to themselves an upper lower will be a better split for someone who's advanced because
it allows you to isolate just upper body or lower body on on a particular workout.
And see people think you can get more variety by doing that because you're not having to dilute that
session amongst, you know, the full body.
And to go back to what you've been saying, it doesn't allow you to do that.
If anything, well, well, it is.
It's less, it's, it's more limiting than doing a full body.
Because if you are doing upper, lower, upper, lower, which to me I think is a good intermediate
plan, but not a good advanced plan because it means you're limited by how many exercises you can
still do on well on one of those sessions because ultimately you need to repeat it again.
You don't get the benefit of having two unique sessions.
So it's no different really to doing full body AB or, or you're getting less benefit than if you're
doing full body AB because you don't get to say, well I'm going to do 8 exercises for my upper 1 and
I'm going to do 8 exercises for my upper 2 and I get 16 exercises across a week.
You don't get that benefit because you get a whole week between them.
So you're actually better off if you're on advanced lift and you need more variety.
You're way better off doing something like a full body AB split than trying to make it work with an
upper lower four times per week.
Exactly.
And we have to remember that the maintenance literature is all done in, you know, sort of people
with only sort of three to six months of training experience.
It's not done with people with years of of kind of muscle mass.
And the interesting thing is if you look at the physiological underpinnings of that atrophy as it
occurs is non linear.
It happens faster the more muscle mass you have.
So the bigger a muscle fiber is, the faster it can start shrinking when you when you cease to load
it regularly and you've got load data like that.
And I'll do a kind of a Friday post on that soon.
I've got amazing series of graphs showing the kind of sort of sort of nonlinear graphs with most
rapid atrophy occurring immediately after the end of a, you know, sort of stimulus period.
So we know that the more muscle mass somebody has, the more muscle fibre, the larger the most fibre
that they have, the faster the atrophy is going to happen.
So you're going to find that the advanced lifter, if you think about the net stimulus across a week
from being atrophy deducted from the hypertrophy, obviously everybody knows that the advanced lifter
is going to be increasing muscle fiber size by tiny, tiny, tiny percentages, you know, almost
insignificantly in, you know, sort of that nature.
But the atrophy is going to be greater.
So you've got a situation where we know physiologically that the advanced person is going to be
getting less hypertrophy with each workout and greater atrophy between workouts.
So you know, that thing is this perception that people believe.
I don't know why, Maybe just again the confusion effect of anabolics that you know, people who have
achieved a larger muscle size can somehow preserve that without training.
Physiologically, the opposite is probably the case, almost certainly the case because hypertrophy is
definitely going to be less and I don't think anybody disagrees on that particular point.
But atrophy is going to be faster.
And if you don't think atrophy is going to be faster because you haven't looked at the data, then
OK, it's going to be the same, you know, but ultimately you're going to find the balance is
different.
So what we would expect is that the more well trained you are, the more frequency is going to play a
role at all, you know.
So yes, I just want to reinforce what you said a moment ago, which is that upper lower is a horrible
split for an advanced person.
It really is.
The only reason that, you know, recent bodybuilders have kind of managed to get away with that is
the is the pharmaceutical support.
I think that anybody who's trying to do this without that is going to need to use a full body and as
I say eventually gravitate towards full body AB because that's what gives you the maximum possible
variety.
We're still maintaining that that stimulus across the week.
Unless there's someone like Steve who can do your 20.
Unless you're and there's just deep breaths and you can do a billion exercises in one session in
there training for two hours and it's sort of like you're not even breathing hard when you're taking
2 minutes right between squats.
Yeah, OK.
You know.
I started playing with full body.
No, not full body with upper lower, so upper lower 6.
Times a week, basically splitting the full body out into two days, yeah.
Yeah, And I started writing out some of those plans and it was like a sigh of relief because every
time I have to write an upper lower plan, I I just feel.
So I'm locked in.
Yeah.
And when I started doing this, I was like, Oh my God, I can do upper one.
I can do an upper 2.
Like it was just like, Oh my God, this works now, but you're.
Basically just writing a Stevie's program and splitting in half.
I mean, that's that's really.
Yeah, yeah.
Now we covered a lot in this.
I, I just want to do like a little TLDR.
If you, if you got to the end, you're like, well, maybe stick to this point, I don't know.
But there's a few key points I think we covered and and you know, ultimately you ever think about
some of the, some of these points as well?
But ultimately we did talk about are you going to get more bang for your buck out of doing three
sets of one exercise, one set of three exercises?
And what you've established there is that, well, for all the muscle fibres that are active across
those three different exercises, you're still getting that same multiple set stimulus for those
muscle fibers.
But because everything is happening at a muscle fiber level, whether it's hypertrophy or atrophy,
then we're saying is in that in the extra variance, some of those fibers are getting that single set
that they wouldn't be getting otherwise.
Yeah.
And then the point that I think maybe you alluded to or maybe you did mention it was based on, on
that, that also means that there are going to be muscle fibers that can hypertrophy while other
fibers are atrophying in the same muscle.
And I don't, I don't know if people necessarily grasp that.
We're saying, yes, actually the same muscle, the lats can be hypertrophying while other fibers are
atrophying.
The total size can be going up.
We're not saying that your lats as a whole are getting smaller, but there are some fibres where,
especially if you're not using more excise variation, where those fibres will be getting smaller.
Yeah.
And I mean, ultimately that's what happens during detraining.
So, you know, if we if we sort of do a strength training program and then we, you know, go on
holiday for two weeks and we don't train more on holiday, we start to see, you know, atrophy
occurring, but we're not atrophying the most fibres that we use to walk along the beach.
Yeah.
You know, so I use, you know, I've said this 100 times and I think it sort of sails over most
people's heads.
But the mechanical tension that muss fibers generate that triggers them to grow is determined by the
force velocity relationship.
So if you stroll along the beach enjoying the weather or sunshine rather, then your muscle fibers
are moving very slowly, at least the muscle fibers that are activated and they're producing high
forces, high mechanical tension that stimulates them to essentially they're not going to grow
because they've already maxed out their growth capacity, but they're going to stay the same.
If on the other hand, you were to, instead of going on holiday, you'd have an unfortunate accident
and end up with your leg in a cast, then the whole limb would shrink.
Why would that happen?
Would it be because none of the fibers are now activated?
So the difference between mobilization induced atrophy and detraining induced atrophy is just the
difference in the number of fibers, you know.
So atrophy is fibre specific, semi hypertrophy is fibre specific.
So ultimately this translates perfectly talk saying about exercise selection.
It's like whichever fibers you're activating and loading are going to grow.
Whichever ones you're not are not going to grow.
In fact, if you persist in not loading them, select maybe you go from a highly, highly varied
exercise program with lots of different exercises in and it was everything was growing and then you
suddenly shrink down and just do squat, bench, deadlift for three months.
You're going to see that most fibres that were used in those previous exercises that you're not now
using.
I mean, again, we go into details on this in a separate podcast, but you're going to see a lot of
localized atrophy because of mussifiers that you're no longer training.
So it's just such an important point.
And I think there's a, there's just this, I think belief at the moment in some parts of the fitness
industry that, you know, a row and a pull down and a pullover, they're all training the same
mussifiers.
So you just choose whichever 1 you want and interchange them and it doesn't really matter.
And nothing could be further from the truth.
You know, I think there's basically totally different motor units are going to be prioritized for
different activities based on.
The efficiency requirement and new mechanical matching principle is what largely determines that for
us.
Everything happening at a muscle fiber level, I think ultimately that's one of the key takeaways
here.
And the question is always, you know what, to what magnitude, to what degree is that?
But ultimately whether we're talking about excise variation or we're talking about volume, we're
talking about atrophil, we're talking about any of this stuff.
And one needs to start from the place of we're talking about muscle fibers, we're not talking about
whole muscle.
Exactly as I said, I wasn't being entirely flippant when I said I could literally repeat that for
the rest of my time in the fence and it wouldn't be a waste of time.
Because I show, you know, it will be two years down the road and I shall still be saying the same
thing.
I'll be saying that model that you know, is being proposed by XYZ or these groups can't possibly
work because hypertrophy and atrophy muscle fiber specific.
And it'll be the same mistake every single time.
It'll be the same mistake, yes, You know, because for some reason, whatever has happened, people now
just think in terms of I'm training a muscle on that.
Not that's not how it works.
That's not how the body works.
Frequency muscle fibres.
And therefore frequency becomes fibre specific as well, because everything is fibre specific.
Any other TLDR points?
You've got first or I have no more wisdom to share.
I'm definitely done for the day.
Yeah, that's cool.
Thank you, thank you everyone for joining us.
Hopefully you've got some Nuggets of, of wisdom and gold out of this one, especially if you guys who
write programs, you know, there's, there's a fair bit of, of application.
So hopefully you guys go and, and use some of that and we'd love to hear how you go with it as well.
So if you do apply some of this stuff, I love hearing getting messages from you guys being like, I
started doing this and, and I noticed this, so I grew better than whatever.
And we'd love to hear that feedback.
So please do that.
Please like and subscribe and review and all the good stuff in our podcast.
And we'll, we hope you'll join us next week for another episode.