Episode: 002 How long does the growth stimulus last after a training session?
URL: https://open.spotify.com/episode/3DMCjq0tdsUk50TcnDbY28
Published: 2025-06-01
================================================================================

Welcome back to our second episode of Hypertrophy Past and present.
Now, if you're joining us for the first time in this podcast, what we endeavour to do is go back in
time and look at bodybuilding before the introduction of anabolics and examine it through the lens
of modern muscle Physiology.
To do that, all the fun stuff, we've got Chris Beasley here.
Chris my Co host, how are you doing?
I'm doing well.
Thanks, Jake.
Good to be here.
And we're going to introduce you to begin with with another old school bodybuilding plan.
Now if you did join us last week, we started with one of the first bodybuilding plans that was mass
produced and that was by a company called Milo Barbell Company.
Now, when we did examine that, we looked at some things that they did quite well and some things
that perhaps could have been evolved or adapted over time and maybe, you know, made a little bit
better.
But as a foundation, there were some really interesting, I guess, principles or core elements of
that plan.
And today the plan is about 25 years later.
So what we have to begin with here is a York Barbell Company plan.
Now, Milo, here's your little history.
One O 1 lesson, Milo Barbell Company turned into York Barbell Company.
It was bought by a guy named Bob Hoffman and they continued on a lot of the similar work.
They made barbells, they made plans and, or what you know, they called courses back then and they
developed a number of different courses.
And the course we're going to look at today was one of the later courses they developed.
And I mentioned last week for you guys who joined us that the first Milo course didn't have any
sets.
Sets did not exist at that point.
No one talked about sets.
What they said is you would do this movement and you do 15 movements of it.
You do 10 movements and that's how many repetitions you do.
And no one thought about sets.
Now at this point in time, we're talking about 1951 is, is when this plan, at least a version of it
I have was published.
And at this point, they've now started to develop sets.
And we're going to talk a little bit more about the sets and the way they do that in a moment
because it's quite interesting.
But I'm getting a little bit ahead of myself.
I want to tell you about the plan first.
So the plan is another 12 exercise plan, which is interesting because they followed that format from
from Milo Barbell Company.
And if you listen to the way they talk about it, they, they essentially say that it takes about 12
exercises to adequately stimulate the entire body.
And I actually think that's a fairly fair observation.
There's a couple exercises maybe I'll do differently and I'm sure we'll talk about that.
But that's interesting in and of itself that as a complete body plan, they think you need about 12
exercises.
So those 12 exercises were exercise one was a one arm seated dumbbell supinated curl, so not
alternating, but one arm at a time.
Exercise 2 was a flat bench.
So this is obviously an adjustment from last week because they didn't have any any real much chest
exercise last time they didn't have a bench.
So here we have a flat bench and they specifically state to do the widest possible grip.
Then we have a regular deadlift and I'll talk about that more in a moment as well.
But for now, regular deadlift and then we have a bent barbell pullover.
They loved the pullovers back then.
Then we have a dumbbell side to side bend, then a triceps overhead extension with dumbbells, then a
bent over barbell row using a fairly wide pronated grip, and then we have a wide lat pull down a
pronated grip.
Now they did specify they prefer to do this behind the neck and you could also do a behind the neck
pull up instead if you wanted.
And then we have a standing calf phrase with dumbbell.
So you're holding a dumbbell in in one hand and doing a calf raise.
Then we have now this one, you're going to have to use your imagination with me.
So it was called a back press and shoulder spread.
And what they did is they used a kind of like resistance band type piece, a chest expander
essentially, but it like a like a band and they had their imagine their elbows by their side and
hands pointing out to the side.
And what they would do is extend their arms.
So you'll kind of move into like a crucifix position.
And then once you've extended, you protract your shoulder or you you fully extend, then you retrack
your shoulder blade and then you protract again.
So.
So this is a frontal plane movement.
Yes, yes.
Right.
OK.
So it's kind of like a lateral raise or it's doing the same job as a lateral raise because it's it's
obviously abducting the shoulder, which obviously the middle belt is going to be the prime mover
there with a little bit of anterior.
So not not getting ahead of ourselves too much, but there is a very big difference between this
program and the previous one in terms of the amount of overhead pressing work.
Yes, yes.
The last time one of the things that you explained was that there was a really big focus on overhead
pressing or or at least on the on the deltoid complex itself, which was achieved through overhead
pressing because of the focus and the aesthetic goals that those guys had at that time.
And it's really fascinating to see that that has changed as we've passed through this generation, if
you like 25 year period.
And we've moved away from that focus on overhead pressing and shoulder development.
And we're now looking at a different selection of exercises, which probably has a different set of
aesthetic goals.
But I think this is probably the exercise that they're doing for the shoulder complex.
It's just interesting.
I wonder why they moved away from doing the overhead pressing and towards this perhaps slightly less
conventional exercise.
I mean, it's not like over pressing is difficult to manage or set up or handle.
So it's just so very curious whether there's any.
Context I haven't given you here, so I, I will give you some.
I, I showed you this plan.
I do need to finish.
There's two more exercises.
The next one is a reverse crunch, which they call the leg raise and then it finishes with a squat,
which they would have called a, a deep knee bend.
Now that's all I've shown you, but there's a bit more context.
And the additional context to that is firstly, this was what they call the Mr. America course.
So they claim that a lot of the Mr. America competitors and winners, and that includes people like
Grimmick and Steve Reeves and George Eiferman Dellinger, they say that these people followed this
system or something very similar to it.
So this was not their standard beginner plan for, you know, a specialization phase or anything like
that.
This was like, this is what you do to look like a silver era competitor, someone who's going to get
on stage.
So that's context #1 context #2 I didn't know whether to start with this or not, but I will say it
now is when you look at this in the way that they present it, they're super, super vague with sets
and with repetitions.
And when they talk about sets, they, they're now at a point where they say, you know what sets will
produce better results.
But the way you do your sets are either you add a second or third set to the muscle you're trying to
develop and and everything else gets one set.
Or better yet, what they suggest you do is you add an additional one or two exercises for that
muscle group.
And they actually provide additional exercises for each of these categories.
So when you look at the bench, they've given the wide grip bench, the additional exercises they
provide are multiple versions of overhead pressing, incline pressing.
And so that is ultimately what they're suggesting is actually have another one or two exercises if
you want to develop the deltoids that will include some kind of overhead pressing.
Now there's a couple other bits I want to mention, but I might just pause there.
Apart from the overhead pressing that you've mentioned, what are your initial thoughts?
There's so there's so much to say here.
It's it's really, really interesting, especially as I say when you compare it with with what we
talked about last week.
So obviously you've already highlighted that we've now got a bench press in the training program,
which we didn't have in the previous time and we talked in great detail last time about why that
might be.
But we've still got the pullover though.
So it's interesting that that hasn't dropped out even though they've kind of put in an exercise
which with the wide grip is going to be extremely effective for training all regions of the PEC.
So it's like we've got this additional exercise that does that job, but we're still keeping the
pullover in the program.
So there's an interesting kind of overlap there in having that still there.
Suspect that that's not necessarily going to be potentially the perfect combination of exercises, at
least as far as I'm concerned.
Interesting that you've got, I can't remember actually.
Did we have obliques in the last training program?
Do we have the side bends in the last?
We did not have the side bend we had.
I don't actually recall.
We potentially had something had something similar, but obviously we've also now got the leg raise
in this training program and we've got the regular deadlift.
We talked last time about there was a straddle lift, which kind of looked like either a Jefferson
deadlift or maybe something that was a little bit more squat pattern in its kind of function rather
than necessarily it's appearance, but it was functioning more like a squat type pattern.
Now one of the things that we didn't dwell on last time because potentially it was just too obvious
is that at the time when bodybuilding was really getting going, there weren't things like knee
extension machines and leg curl machines and all of those type exercises that we rely on a lot today
for maximal development of the erectus, Morris and the and the hamstrings.
But they didn't really do deadlifts either last time, and they didn't do leg raisers.
Now, the interesting thing about leg raisers is that it's basically a hip flexor exercise.
Now yes, you can argue that it involves the ABS and other things and what have you, but
fundamentally the first part of hip flexion is actually the rectus for Morris.
So what's really interesting here is that from last time to this time, we've now got 2 exercises
that do hamstrings to a certain degree and they do rectus femoris to a certain degree.
And that is literally 2 of the major observations I had last time missing things.
So we're starting to see corrections over time or developments, evolutions over time to fix or fix
or fill in areas that potentially weren't being developed so much last time.
I'm just to.
With the deadlift as well that one of the alternative exercises they provide is a stiff leg
deadlift.
Yeah, exactly.
Which would be really, really perfect for the hamstrings in the context of the equipment that
they've got, you know, available to them.
So I'm just flicking back to last time's conversation and the and the exercises that were included
there.
They did have a weighted crunch but I can't see a side bend there so they.
Had the I think one arm overhead dumbbell exercise that involves.
Some course that would definitely, that would definitely probably count in that category.
But just to kind of conclude that little section of that concept that I'm trying to articulate
there.
There is also a wide grip lap pull down here, which we didn't have last time.
And I think I probably highlighted that as my biggest criticism last time.
I think I said something along the lines of, you know, a pull up bar is not, you know, difficult to
set up.
Why couldn't we have a pull up bar and do wide grip pull ups and have lower lat development?
You know, well, we've got that now.
We've got wide grip pull ups which is clearly going to develop the lower lats very effectively.
I'm not really seeing perfect full lat development because I think the grip width on the row is
quite wide.
So OK, fine with the pullover and the wide grip row and the the wide grip pull down, you're getting
a 90% development on the back.
But if you wanted to absolutely Max that out, I'd want to see a narrow grip grow or a narrow grip
pull down or a narrow grip pull up as well.
And I suspect you're going to tell me that narrow grip pull ups were obviously a possible
alternative.
Exactly.
Exactly.
So I think, you know, we're probably approaching a point where these guys, if you count the
alternatives, then these guys have probably got pretty much everything that you can do with the
available equipment of the time.
And again, I'm saying that in complete ignorance of when the first knee extension machine was built
and when the first leg curl was built.
You have to forgive me, historians of machinery as regards to the gym, but I think this is really
interesting because it actually does nail so much more in comparison with what we saw last time.
So with each of those alternatives, there's about 5 or 6 alternatives they provide and they're
fairly thoroughly done.
So even just for exercise one, the sink, which is interesting in and of itself, the single arm
seated dumbbell supinated curl, even if we talk about body unit recruitment, doing one arm at a time
is quite interesting.
But for example, the variations they provide for that include a curl with the incline bench hammock
curl, the reverse grip curl.
So the variations are generally different enough that they are actually providing pretty much
comprehensive development of each of the muscles.
Now there's another point I wanted to make.
I touched it loosely with the sets and how they said, well, you could just add in an additional, you
know, some of these exercises.
Now, as far as repetitions, I find this quite interesting because they were really kind of laissez
faire with the repetitions.
And effectively what they said was, well, you know, 6 to 15 is a sort of good starting point.
Like you do this double progression method, start with six, add a repitude when you get to 15, go
heavier, go back.
But then they're kind of like, well, but also sometimes, you know, maybe go for 15 repetitions in
total and you could do a set of, you know, a set of seven and a set of eight, or you could do 3 by 5
or you could do 5 triples.
And, and the kind of just like the sets don't really matter, like go for about 15 repetitions and
however you want to get there, 2 sets of seven or five sets of threes or whatever.
You know, that's, that's pretty good, right?
And even that point is quite interesting.
Well, if you're getting 1512 to 15 repetitions in more than one sets, they're generally fairly good
set formations.
So I find it interesting that there's sort of a de emphasis on this is exactly how many sets you
need to do.
This is exactly how many repetitions you need to do.
And, and it's almost like you think 12 to 15 reps is good.
Get there with fives or with sixes or with sevens.
We don't particularly mind.
That's ultimately going to lead you between two and four sets.
From a physiological point of view, what's really interesting about that is that that will actually
give you more or less the same amount of post workout fatigue.
So if you do one set of 15 or you do three sets of five, that's not going to be miles apart in terms
of what your post workout fatigue is going to look like.
So in terms of constructing a program that allows you to just keep doing whichever of those
combinations you wish, but still keeping the same structure over time and doing the same number of
workouts per week, that will work really nicely.
So from a physiological point of view, it's interesting to see that they developed that kind of
approach to the problem because it will work from a frequency standpoint.
What it probably doesn't work from as a standpoint is that the idea that it's going to give you the
same amount of muscle growth because I don't think that's going to happen.
If you do three sets of five, you're going to get way better results that don't want set of 15 for
example.
But ultimately is not so far apart that you would necessarily notice that immediately.
It's probably something that's going to just kind of catch up with you after a couple of months of
training.
So that is an interesting observation because it's kind of two totally separate kind of sides of
things.
And you say, well, from a, you know, if they were looking for can I recover and make this program
work, then that framework you just explained is perfect because it does.
If you're looking at it from the point of view as does this get me where I want to go?
That's where it starts to break down because I don't think it is going to get them to the same
place.
If you persist in that type of training, you know, if you persisted doing single sets of 15 and
somebody else persisted in doing three sets of five.
But that's what you're describing to me is that that's not how it was used.
They would mix and match and they would do different things at different times.
So maybe it just wasn't being observed because simply it wasn't being compared with anything.
So you can kind of see how they might have got to that point.
We had a conversation a long time ago and you made this point that it it there's not a lot of value
in periodizing repetitions.
And at the time there was a conversation that was happening alongside that where, you know, we're
kind of talking about this periodization make sense at all.
And, and you know, maybe there's an idea that maybe periodizing different exercises could make more
sense to your regional hypertrophy as opposed to different repetitions because you're not getting a
repetition specific hypertrophy benefits, right?
Like a set of 15, a set of five's going to give you the same form of hypertrophy.
Now what I find interesting in this is there doesn't seem to be that emphasis on, well, when you do
the fifteens, you get this type of growth.
When you do the five, you get this type of growth.
They even suggested going down, doing a 54321 at some point and they don't say, well, that's going
to give you this type of growth compared to 15.
So it's almost like they know, hey, this growth is all the same essentially.
They do talk about flushing your muscle and stuff, but they don't sort of emphasize you need these
different repetitions.
It's almost more like a like an enjoyment sort of aspect or a variety motivation.
And I think that's a really interesting concept where it's like, hey, this is all doing the same
thing.
Change repetitions if you want because it's motivating.
You don't need to get locked into thinking you're getting anything different out of it, but you are
getting some extra motivation.
Absolutely.
And I think that if we just trim the edges of that and say, you know, if most of our variation is
bouncing between two sets of 7 to 8 and three sets of four to six, then those two Rep ranges are
awesome.
They're really, really awesome.
I think if most of the variation is bouncing between those two, and very occasionally you might
bounce up to one set of the higher Rep end of the spectrum and maybe a scattering of reps a bit
lower than that.
But those are done.
If you imagine a normal distribution, those are done much, much more infrequently than the two in
the middle, then I think that would be the perfect balance.
I think of getting that little bit of variety and enjoyment and what have you, as you say, all doing
the same thing and still remaining within that framework of always recovering in pretty much the
same period of time.
So, you know, a lot of the time we try and balance these ideas of motivation and interest and
enjoyment with the ideal optimal program that we're all seeking to find, most of us are seeking to
find.
But I think this is a really interesting way of, of, of trying to solve that question because it
says, look, here is a way of making sure that the fatigue problem is nailed down, it's squared away,
and you're not having to worry about redoing your entire program every time you change Rep ranges.
But equally, you've got that ability to move things around.
And I think that's a really, really nice way of doing.
And just as I say, refining it very slightly and creating a bit of a normal distribution and saying,
well, look, you know, most of the change has got to be between the two in the middle 2 sets of seven
or eight or three sets of four to six.
But then occasionally you can drop down to sort of a scattering of lower reps and occasionally you
can jump up to 1 sort of slightly higher reps than that 14 to 15 territory if that's something that
you really feel that would be motivating to do for a couple of weeks and it all kind of works.
I think that's really, really nice.
That's pretty.
Cool.
And they also emphasize ideally just doing once a week, what they call working on the nerve
effectively that's ultimately going to failure or going near your your absolute limit.
So that I think is quite interesting as well.
If you think about the fact that you're repeating this, this workout plan, say Monday, Wednesday,
Friday, then maybe the Monday session, you're quote, working on the nerves, you're, you're taking
that set to failure.
And then essentially those that Wednesday, Friday session, you might be matching that.
And so it's that little bit easier in in in a sense, I think.
That so we we won't Rep in reserve unless we've dedicated a particular session to training to
failure.
Yeah, yeah.
Got it.
Nice.
That is very much the the format I follow with my own programming like it for me personally, in the
gym, I change reps as I feel I might do sets of five some days or some weeks.
And if I'm just doing one set, then I might do 1210 or 12 repetitions because I don't need a warm up
as much.
And then sometimes I might do this 54321 type thing and doing generally one of those sessions to
failure and then matching it for those other two sessions.
So I think for me, I look at that, I'm like, this is a really.
Nice complete plan.
Yeah, absolutely.
And I think there's certainly with access to today's equipment, we would tweak things and do
different selections of exercises.
But when you look at the limitations of the equipment they had access to, it becomes quite difficult
to beat these kind of programs, especially when you look at the I mean, especially when you look at
the alternatives that they provide.
And you say, you know, actually, I don't like this this kind of weird shoulder expanded thing that
you described.
No, I actually just want to do a standard overhead press.
And you know, that's, that's my preference.
And if you kind of start to select those or you know, you'd like to say, I don't particularly want
to do a conventional deadlift.
I'd much rather do a stiff leg to guarantee really good hamstrings development because I know the
conventional isn't going to be as good at that.
So, you know, when you start to take out some of the kind of exercise that you don't necessarily
prefer and you sort of impose or you know, replace those with ones that you think are better or just
more preferable to you.
And I think actually this starts to look like a pretty perfect program in in many respects.
And as you've made the point repeatedly, certainly 100 times better than most of what we're going to
see online today.
Absolutely.
Chris, I know you want to move on and talk about another topic.
I have two questions for you on this and then I'm going to let you do that.
So my first question is what do you think is happening in that that shoulder expander exercise?
So they do talk about going into protraction, retracting, protracting.
What is the value do you think of doing that?
And then the second question I have is simply following up same question I asked you last week.
What is one thing in particular you think that would make this plan even better?
Beyond the exercise selection, is there anything else that's that you think could be improved upon?
So both of those questions are not vanilla in in the least.
I'm not sure I'm going to be able to do them justice.
But I think I think really the, the exercise itself to me, as I say, feels like an overhead press
replacement in general in the wide grip, the frontal plane.
So for me, it kind of is trying to do the, the lateral raise part of modern program.
The protraction bit is, is quite interesting and it'd be really fascinating just to kind of sit down
with a then anatomy textbook.
I'm sure people out there can do this probably better than I can and just think about which muscles
that might be working.
My gut feel is it might be siratis anterior.
But again, it's like, I just want to sit down and think about that.
It's not something that I would want to rush into assuming, you know, I think there's a tendency
today, especially on social media for people to be like, oh, well, you need to have an answer for
everything right away.
I'm like, no, that's not how this works.
You know, curiosity is going to get you to the right answer over a longer period of time rather than
just knee jerk jumping to an answer and then having to defend it for the rest of your life because
you said it.
No, that's the that's the problem.
I think with the Internet, it's eternal and you can't kind of walk back stuff very easily.
So I think, yeah, my answer would be, I don't know.
And I, as I say, I think a starting point would be the serratus.
But if somebody comes out and says, no, it can't possibly be the serratus because XY and Z I'd be
like, OK, that's interesting.
So what's what's actually doing that?
For what it's worth, they believe in this made your your shoulder span wider.
That was the point of doing this exercise.
Don't know if that adds anything to it.
Not really.
I mean, I mean that's kind of what we're doing with shoulder training anyway.
So yeah, I don't know.
It's, it's a very interesting question.
I'm sure that there is some anatomy aficionados out there that can shed some light on that.
It's not really something that I tend to spend a lot of time thinking about.
In terms of your second part, as I said, it depends on whether you get to include the alternative
exercises or not.
Not including the alternative exercises.
I think really straight away I'm going to be like I need a stiff leg deadlift in there rather than a
regular deadlift.
I need a narrow grip row in there because otherwise I'm not getting that upper part of the lat fully
developed.
I really don't like the the lateral rays imitation I'm and much rather a proper overhead pressing.
That's just me.
I think overhead presses are brilliant for what they do.
And my personal aesthetics go much closer to what we talked about last time in terms of what those
guys were trying to do.
Anyway.
I have that tendency to look at the ancient Greek statues and think that is probably a better look
than a lot of what we see, you know, kind of today.
So.
But again, that's my personal preference and it doesn't really, you know, necessarily translate to
other people's experiences.
So yeah, I think that would probably be my list, really.
I don't think I've got much more to add to that.
Yeah, wonderful.
So moving on, we've got another topic we're going to cover.
Do you want to introduce us to it?
Sure.
So as always, that was the hypertrophy past section and this is now the hypertrophy present section.
So when we look at hypertrophy happening, obviously we are looking to produce muscle growth over
time and that is the net result of us producing A hypertrophy stimulus in a workout and then losing
some of that hypertrophy stimulus at the point when we start the next workout.
Now the way we talk about this is that each workout has a hypertrophy stimulus period.
So we do the workout and then for a short period of time afterwards and the duration of that time is
going to be the topic of today's conversation.
We do a workout and for a period of time afterwards there is a stimulus period in which the muscle
fibers are increasing in size.
Now, during that period of time, the muscle fibers are not able to lose any size and that's why
we're protected in that period of time.
When we leave that period of time, we go outside of the hypertrophy stimulus period, we're now
losing some of the muscle size and the muscle fiber size that we've gained.
And obviously, if you look at low frequency training programs where we're talking about training a
muscle only once per week, for example, then you're going to have a hypertrophy stimulus period for
however long, let's say 48 hours just as a starting point because that's traditionally what the
literature has referred to.
Then when you leave that 48 hour window, you've now got five days in which you're going to see a
loss of muscle size.
Now the main Internet literature is brilliant at encapsulating this problem because they do one
workout a week of three or four sets.
You get to the next workout the following week and basically all of the hypertrophy you stimulated
in the window post that workout the previous week has now gone.
You've lost all of it, but you haven't lost any more.
So that's why we call them maintenance programs because you kind of create hypertrophy in one
workout and then you lose it by the time you get to the next workout.
And that is very, very contentious in in areas of the Internet where they like, like to claim that
you can do one set per week, you know, once a week and still achieve growth over time.
That's just not what any of the maintenance literature studies show.
They all show that three or four sets once per week basically just keeps you spinning your wheels
and you stay in the same place over time.
So basically what we're interested then in is this duration of the hypertrophy stimulus period.
Now the reason this is so important is because when you start to move away from the one set per week
program where you've got this huge period of time in which you're losing muscle mass from one
workout to the next.
And you start say, well, what happens if I now do 2 workouts per week or three workouts per week?
And what happens if I want to compare 3 workouts a week with two workouts a week?
Well, in that scenario, you're saying, OK, well the duration of my stimulus period now matters quite
a lot.
For example, if my stimulus period lasts 48 hours, then I do my 3 workouts per week and I get a
stimulus period that basically covers almost all of the time apart from one day a week.
And I only have one day a week where I'm likely to lose any muscle size.
So if I'm training Monday, Wednesday, Friday and Sunday is the only day I'm likely to see any
atrophy happening, which makes the full body three times a week programme really, really nice in
that context.
If then I'm doing upper lower and I'm only training a muscle twice a week.
Now I'm struggling because now I've got multiple days per week.
So I do my workout and I get 2 days of sort of hypertrophy stimulus, but then I've got a day still
of atrophy before I do my next work out to the same muscle group.
And then I've got three more days after that, I think.
So two more days, two more days, sorry.
So a total of three days per week, 3 days per week in total of atrophy where I'm actually losing
some size in comparison with a full body where I'm training three days a week and I'm getting
basically only one day.
So that's three times as much atrophy over the week as the full body pair.
That's what's really important.
So just to just to clarify in case we've lost anyone.
So you're saying that because people do talk about atrophy a lot and they say, and I'm one of them
and and they say that, look, we've got all these studies that show X amount of muscles lost in X
amount of time in one week or two weeks or four weeks or whatever.
And you're saying, look, we can leave that aside for now.
What we know is the maintenance studies tell us that there's three to four sets worth that's lost in
seven days.
So then what the question is, is when over that seven day period, do we lose that almost four sets
worth of growth?
And you're saying that if it were two days, then that would say that that full body three times per
week would mean there's only one, one day a week where there's some some of that atrophy occurring.
And you're saying that upper, lower, upper, lower where each muscle's getting trained twice a week,
he's going to have, what is it 3 days per week of atrophy?
If it were, yeah, exactly stimulus period.
So then the question, now the question is, well, is it 2 days?
Exactly.
And so obviously if you are a defendant, a proponent of upper lower split, you've got a very strong
motivation to argue that it's 72 hours instead of 48 because you completely then match what upper
lower programs are doing with what full body programs are doing.
More or less you go, you go from three days versus 1 to one day versus 0.
So you you close the gap quite considerably in terms of the the atrophy.
Now it doesn't actually completely fix the problem because you still have to go back and explain how
the maintenance studies work.
So if you have maintenance studies as showing that three, as you said correctly, 3 or 4 sets per
week is the amount of Hypertroy stimulus that's then lost, the amount of Hypertroy that has been
stimulated, which is then lost.
If you do it with a 48 tower window, you've then got five days, which is basically saying that you
lose about 20% per day of that previous workouts stimulus.
So if you are doing a full body program with three sets per workout and you're doing that three
times a week, then your one day of atrophy is losing 20% of one of those workouts per week, which is
really not very much at all.
Now if on the other hand you said well, no, we think it's 72 hours, then what you have to then do is
go back to your maintenance studies and say it's not 5 days anymore, it's four days.
So now you've got a four day window.
So you're now losing 25% per day.
So this is this is one of the fascinating things that people who argue for 72 hours during those
periods haven't thought through.
Because when they make that argument, they don't realize that they then have to go back and face the
maintenance literature, which is very, very consistent.
And that's one of the cool things about it.
There's just every single study shows the same thing.
So they now have to go back and say, actually, I've just kind of, I've just kind of undermined my
own argument because on the one hand, I'm arguing that the stimulus period is longer, but on the
other hand, I'm now arguing without realizing, I'm now arguing that my attribute rate is faster.
Which is also that would mean that that not that it matters as much, but it means that that one day,
if it were 72 hours stimulus period, it means.
That the one day matters even more?
Yes, exactly.
Yeah, exactly.
So it's like you can't have both things at the same time.
You kind of end up in the situation where you're arguing against yourself because you haven't
thought everything through.
And that's why I think it's kind of weird when people have these conversations because they're not
realizing that they're arguing with themselves in a vacuum.
And that actually when they come out and start trying to fit it together with everything else that's
happening in the literature, it just doesn't work anyway, but the topic of today's conversation is
how long is the stimulus period?
Now what a lot of people will do is they will say we're just going to use the duration of the post
workout elevation in muscle protein synthesis rates or myofibular protein synthesis rates.
Now let me just clarify a couple of things very quickly.
When we talk about an elevation in either muscle protein synthesis rates or myofibular proteins in
the situation, what we're saying is that we're increasing the rate at which new proteins are being
constructed so that we add that protein to the muscle fibers.
So we're always making proteins and removing them.
And what we're saying is that we're just increasing the rate of making synthesis and that's allowing
us to then accrue more protein inside the fibers and that makes them bigger.
So what's the difference between muscle and myofibrilla?
Well, muscle includes everything including the non contractile elements and myofibrilla just
includes the myofibrils.
So what we're saying is anything that is inside a myofibril that's regarded as myofibrilla protein
synthesis, muscle protein synthesis is more general.
Now couple of quick observations on that.
The myofibrilla stuff is predominant is what we really are increasing when we're trying to create
hypertrophy because you know, 8090% of the fiber is myofibrils.
So if we add new myofibrils, that's how we make the fiber bigger and that it makes the fiber
stronger.
And so that's what we're more more interested in.
The problem is that we've got a lot more data on muscle proteins and this is so it's useful to refer
to that.
And of course, if you've got data for muscle protein synthesis, it does include what's happening in
the myofibrilla portion.
It's like a sort of Venn diagram. 1 sits inside the other.
Other observation that's very important is that some people, and this is not in the scientific
literature, this is definitely a fitness influencer phenomenon.
Some people are running around saying that muscle protein synthesis includes muscle damage repair,
whereas myofibular protein synthesis doesn't.
That's absolutely not true.
So you have to repair myofibrils.
Therefore, myofibular protein synthesis rate elevations are doing muscle damage repair in the same
way that muscle protein synthesis rate elevations are doing damage repair.
And that brings me to where we're going to start today's conversation, which is that you can't
actually use the duration of your post workout muscle protein synthesis rate elevation or your post
workout myofibrilla protein synthesis rate elevation to tell you how long the hypertrophy stimulus
period lasts.
Because you've actually got a very large chunk of muscle damage repair happening from those two rate
elevations as well as the hypertrophy that is happening.
So you've got to look at when and how muscle damage repair is happening and when, and it's likely to
need those rate elevations in the same way that you could look at when the hypertrophy stimulus
might be being processed and when it therefore might need those MPs and Myop's rate elevations.
So basically, hopefully this is a kind of a sufficient introduction to get people up to speed with
where we are in terms of understanding the tools that we've got for measuring the duration of the
hypertrophy stimulus period and what the limitations are with using MPs and Myop's rate elevations
in this particular context.
Just quickly again to summarize in case you lost anyone, so the acronyms are working off here, MPs
and MYOPS, I'm sure you guys have all seen that online.
And we were talking about the stimulus period.
And when that stimulus period is over is when that atrophy begins.
And so we're trying to work out how long is that, that stimulus period.
And unfortunately, we can't just look at stimulus period.
We have to look at stimulus period plus damage.
And you're saying that Myops is actually telling us both stimulus period and damage.
So now we need to work out how can we separate those two.
Exactly, and what I've done is I've collected 3 observations which you know you guys at home can go
away and have a look at and there's infographics available on these and studies and various bits and
pieces that you can can look at.
The first thing I want to just describe is that we've got some really nice data on what you can call
non exercise muscle injury.
So if you injure a muscle like you bruise because you bump into a hard object or you maybe there's a
like you've got a study where maybe a muscle is cut slightly.
It's called a laceration in the literature.
So bruises are called contusions in the literature and, and, and cuts are called lacerations.
And you can do also something called volumetric muscle loss, which is where they actually cut a
little piece of muscle out of a tissue.
So there's various different models that they can use which are creating damage of a muscle and
muscle is extraordinarily resilient and it it bounces back from these situations very, very
effectively.
So we see these models available in the literature where they create non exercise muscle injury and
then they measure the rate of muscle protein intenses over time.
And one of the really fascinating observations that comes up time and again is that initially in the
first sort of 24 to 36 hours, well, certainly in the 1st 12 to 20 hours, there's actually a
reduction in, in, in MPs.
The MPs doesn't increase in the first kind of 12 to sort of 1620 hours.
And then it starts to come back above baseline again.
So we're, we're, we're not seeing any kind of elevation in MPs as a result of this muscle damage.
Now the reason for this goes beyond what we're going to talk about today, but it's because fatigue
mechanisms and muscle damage mechanisms actually do occur in the period of time after the what they
technically call an insult.
Basically the point in which the injury or the damage happened mechanically, as in the the cut or
the laceration or the volumetric loss.
You then see a period of time in which you've got subsequent additional damage mechanisms happening
in the same way that we see post workout damage mechanisms happening because of calciumine
accumulation.
So you've actually got a period of time in which you're actually creating even more damage and
you're clearing things away and you're basically just clearing the ground in order to rebuild of the
structure that you've, you know, kind of damaged.
So there's nothing really going on in terms of NPS for quite a period of time.
And then you start to see an uptick and it starts to increase and increase and increase.
And really it's kind of around, sort of depends on the study, I suppose.
But I, I did an infographic of this recently.
Let me just see if I can grab it.
That's not the one I was looking for.
Here it is.
So yeah, it kind of comes above, it kind of comes above the point where you would say it's an
elevation in, in, in NPS around about, you know, sort of 2436 hours.
So we're seeing that muscle damage process really starting to kick up over the second day of our
original 48 hour window.
Now in these damage models, obviously the damage is quite severe.
So you see them kind of continuing up and increasing to 48 and 72 and what have you.
So this is not really in the context of what we're interested in, but the important thing that we're
starting with then is that when we have muscle damage happening, it doesn't actually elevate MPs in
the 1st probably 12 to 16 hours at all.
In fact, it decreases it and then you start to see it come above baseline and really it gets into
meaningful territory around about 24 to 36 hour period of that post injury point.
So first thing I wanted to just help people understand is that when we're talking about MPs, it
happens.
It starts much later when we're talking about damage and it goes on for longer.
So if you create a large amount of damage, what you're expecting to see is very little happening in
that first day or so.
And then you're expecting to see days and days and days afterwards of elevated MPs.
Now, the really interesting thing is if you look at, I believe the longest duration of Myops in the
literature and Myops, not MPs, I believe is actually from an aerobic exercise workout.
So a lot of people go, oh, if I do, you know, this wonderful, amazing high volume strength training
program that I've created that I think is the best thing since sliced bread.
And I think it's going to create, you know, 72, nine, 6000 Myops.
Well, it might do, but it's not it's probably not doing that because it's produced to this wonderful
high hypertrophy stimulus, you know, because we've got this aerobic exercise workout, they'll do
exactly the same thing and I guarantee you that's not producing any hypertrophy.
Yes and no one's.
Arguing, hey, I can go for a very long downhill run and that's going to get me jacked.
The interesting thing is it wasn't even a downhill run.
You know, it was actually mostly, mostly concentric.
So the really interesting thing is it definitively does look like, you know, if you just do a decent
volume of contractions.
Obviously in the calcium ion related team model, we understand how that works, but you are going to
see that sort of perpetuated Myops elevation, which is obviously not doing hypertrophy, but the
duration is extended because you're creating this this damage.
So First things first.
The first point I wanted to make is that MPs when it's elevated due to damage is going to start
later and go on for longer.
And obviously that is then very interesting when we look at the studies that are trying to identify
the duration of Hypertrophy's demonstrate because quite simply they can't because anytime you create
damage in the workout that you just did, you're going to have a trail of my OPS going on for days
potentially has absolutely nothing to do with hypertrophy.
To clarify one point there.
So you're saying that there's this delay of 1624 hours when there's just damage.
Have you told us how quickly?
When there's not damage, sorry, when there is damage happening rather than damage repair happening.
So just to clarify, what we're saying is that the processes that are necessary to occur before you
can start rebuilding the damaged tissue involve all of this Cal pain activity to start degrading the
proteins.
And then subsequently you've got an inflammation process which does the same job, but also clears
those broken structures away.
And only then when you've cleared the decks and you've got everything where you need it, you can
start putting the new structures back in place.
And that's when you see the uptick in NPS relating to the damage repair or damage replacement is
probably a better damage structure replacement is probably a more technically accurate term.
So what we're going to do next is talk about two separate situations where we can look at different
training variables.
And training variables are things like rest period, duration and volume and Rep range and all those
kind of things.
So we can look at what happens when you start manipulating training variables to the post workout
Myops.
So when we talked about the damage repair, we talked about NPS because that's what the data is.
Now we're going to talk about Myops because it's a little bit more precise and it gives us a bit
more comfort that we are talking about exactly what we want to talk about.
So when we look at Myops rates after a workout.
So we've moved away from non excise and now we're talking about strength training workouts.
You can look at the effect of things like repetition range and you can look at the effect of things
like rest period duration.
Now the really cool thing is that if you manipulate Rep range and you say, OK, I'm going to do 2
different workouts, same number of sets to failure, one with more moderate loads, maybe 8 to 10 Rep
maxes, one with lighter loads, 2025 maxes.
And you're going to say, I'm expecting that these will produce very, very similar post training
program hypertrophy And therefore the hypertrophy, the component of my Myops should be exactly the
same.
But we know the repetition range greatly effects post workout muscle damage with lighter loads
producing way more muscle damage than heavier loads.
So what I'm expecting to see is a Myops curve that differs between the two workouts only because of
the muscle damage component.
And what's really cool is if you look at these studies, what you find is that the 1st 24 hour
measurement, the measurement taken in the 1st 24 hours is identical between the two workouts.
And that's literally exactly what we've just spent the last 5-10 minutes talking about, which is
that muscle damage NPS just doesn't exist in the 1st 24 hours.
So it can't contribute, which is exactly in line with what we're now describing.
And the interesting thing is that if you then look at the second measurement in the 2nd 24 hour
period, when you take that measurement now Myops rates are much higher in the light load group
compared to the moderately heavy load group.
So literally everything we've just talked about in terms of non exercise muscle injury is jumping
off the page at us and saying, Yep, that's exactly what you would expect based on the information
you've got about damage from different sources.
Now when people just as a very, very quick inter interjection, when people want to argue that damage
from contusions and lacerations and exercise are different things, that's ignorance.
They don't understand how damage works.
They need to go back and look at how calcium ion accumulation actually causes damage in every single
situation in exactly the same way regardless of how you instigate it.
So I'm not having that argument here.
I'm happy to have that argument in another location, but that is just how damage works.
So we've got this observation that light loads is doing this different thing from moderate loads and
only where the damage is high.
Now this brings me to the possibly the most important thing I'm going to say to today.
If we now look at rest period durations, we get the opposite effect.
So rest period duration, long versus short rest periods.
A long rest period gives me more hypertrophy than a short rest period.
So I'm expecting that my OPS is going to be elevated because of that extra hypertrophy stimulus I'm
getting from that long rest period.
But long and short rest periods don't cause massively different outcomes in terms of post workout
fatigue.
So I'm not expecting my muscle damage NPS to be substantially different between these two
situations.
If I now go and look at the literature that's compared MYOPS rate elevations after strength training
workouts with long rests and short rests.
What I find is that my difference is exclusively located in the 1st 24 hour measurement exclusively.
And that tells me that when, and just to be clear, that means on the 2nd 24 hour measurement, the
the second day measurement, there's nothing different between the long and the shortest period
groups.
If hypertrophy was happening on that second day in a meaningful quantity, if MYOPS was being
directed towards hypertrophy on that second day, we would see differences between long and short
rest periods, but we don't see any differences.
What that tells me is that hypertrophy stimulus is largely occurring on that first day and just in
synchronisation with this.
And this is a separate point.
If you look at NPS rates in the famous Damas review paper, which graphed them out and showed them
how they happen over time, the spikes are happening in the 1st 12 to 16 hours.
You know, So what it looks like to me when I'm looking at this literature in, in its entirety and,
and, and considering every aspect of it.
What I think is happening is that we do a strength training workout and we get a really big spike in
Myops that is directed towards or MPs Myops.
So it's directed towards Hypertroy that comes flying down after 12/16/20 hours, however you want to
describe it, depending on whether you're looking at untrained or trained people.
And you start to see it coming, really flying back down.
And then the, the, the kind of the, the slow long, what you call the fat tail in that second day and
3rd day and potentially 4th and 5th days, depending on how much muscle damage you created is doing
muscle damage repair rather than the actual hypertrophy stimulus.
So it's really starting to make us look like, really starting to make it look like the hypertrophy
stimulus period is actually a lot shorter and most of what we're seeing trailing after it is
actually doing muscle damage repair.
In that the math study that you just mentioned, so you said there's this big peak in that sort of 12
to 16 hours comes down.
Does it tick up again or does it then continue to trail down after that 16 hours, do you recall?
So basically if you look at untrained people, it kind of peaks around a sort of 16 hour mark and it
comes back down to a lower level around the 24 and then it kind of just sits there.
If you look at trained people, it's even more kind of shortened.
It's kind of peaking around six hours and it comes flying back down already at about 12:00.
And then again from that point it then just ticks onwards.
So I think we've been thinking about Myops in the wrong way for quite a long time because we've been
kind of looking at it in its entirety and go, and this is, and this is a methodological issue
because what happened, I forget the exact number of years ago, but what happened maybe 8 or 10 years
ago approximately was that researchers from using very short periods of time in which they would
measure MYOPS MPs over maybe 3 or 4 hours using one particular technique.
And they started using a totally different technique and they measured the area under the curve for
say 48 hours or 24 hours.
And that means you don't see the shape of the curve anymore.
And I think on the one hand, it's fantastic to be able to do area under the curve measurements and
see what's happening across 24 or 48 hour windows.
But we lose something when we do that because we no longer know what the shape of the curve is.
So I've got a couple of questions for you, but just before you ask that, so just to again sort of
summarize.
So what you're saying is when we look at the injury caused without any hypertrophy stimulus, we see
that there's no elevation in my OPS for that well in MPs for that first 16 ish, 24 hour period.
Then when we look at 2 conditions where we have the same hypertrophy stimulus, different amounts of
damage, what we see is the 1st 24 hour period of myops looks the same.
And it's only after that then we see a change in myops and then almost the opposite, not quite, but
almost the opposite condition where we have a variance in hypertrophy but not in damage.
In the group that sees more hypertrophy, we see a change in MYOPS elevation in the 1st 24 hours, but
then after that time period it looks relatively similar again.
So my question for you of that is, do we have data in like a single set?
How long that causes an elevation MYOPS?
So this is actually the Third Point that I wanted to describe.
So basically the two previous examples I gave one of repetition range, light versus moderate loads,
one of rest period, short versus long rest periods.
We can do exactly the same study design or they have done exactly the same study design and they've
compared one set and three sets.
Now this is really, really interesting.
So basically if we now look at how Myops rate elevations work with single sets, we essentially get a
elevation, which now there's two ways of thinking about this.
You can either do it statistically or you can do it numerically.
If you look at it statistically, then what the research will tell you is that basically one set will
elevate my OPS for 29 hours, 2829 hours or so.
The issue with that is that it doesn't numerically get all the way back down to baseline.
So if you do it an extrapolation, just extend the line in a linear way, then you'll get down to
baseline around about 3536 hours PowerPoint.
So that's really, really interesting because one set probably doesn't cause a sufficiently large
amount of muscle damage to really produce NPS mild rate elevations for very long at all.
I think really if you want to start with a very good estimate of what a hypertrophy stimulus period
duration is, then you would look at the single set literature and you would go, you know, coming
back down to baseline numerically around about 36 hour .3536 hour point.
That is probably what the hypertrophy stimulus period duration is most of the time, which is
obviously shorter than the standard sort of estimate to 48 hours.
But you know, we wouldn't necessarily expect a linear line going back down to 0.
You might have a long tail that sort of dribbles on for say 4042, you know, maybe even 48 hours I
think at the outside.
But the point is that ballpark we're not seeing 72 hours or anything silly like that.
You know what we're probably seeing is half that and maybe just a kind of very low level of sort of
fiber stimulus lasting a little bit longer.
Now if you look then at the three set group in the same study, now you've got a elevation which is
still high at the point when your single set has come back down to baseline more or less around that
sort of 3030 hour point.
So you've still got that elevation.
Now obviously some people are going to argue that the greater the greater number of sets is
producing a larger duration stimulus rather than a larger simple magnitude of stimulus.
Now this is really interesting because what you can do is you can say well any hype, any Myops rate
elevation that happens in the 1st 24 hours is only going towards hypertrophy.
That's not really that contentious if you read the literature.
Now if we accept that point, which as I say I do not think is contentious, then what you can do is
you can say, well, OK, I've got my one set data here and I've got my three set data here for the my
OPS rate elevation.
And I know that all of that my OPS rate elevation that's happening in the 1st 24 hours has got to go
to hypertrophy.
Well, that means I can now compare the sizes of those two, my OPS rate elevations in my first 24
hour period and I can see how much bigger is my three set compared to my one set.
And all of that extra, what my alteration I'm getting in that first 24 hours is going to go to
hypertrophy.
So if you do that, what you find is that when we use data from say dose responses regarding
hypertrophy, I mean there's two metro analysis available.
You can use the Schoenfeld 1 and you can use the Pelland 1.
So if we use the Schoenfeld one, basically what the Schoenfeldt one tells you is that three sets is
going to give you about 1.6 times as much hypertrophy as one set approximately.
I think if I remember that correctly, ballpark figure maybe it's a little bit less.
It doesn't matter.
The the point is it's not three times.
OK, so, so obviously that then means that I can look at the difference in mild to rate elevations
area under the curve for the 1st 24 hours.
And I can say is that giving me, you know, the extra 60% that I'm expecting in terms of hypertrophy
stimulus compared to the ones that and it pretty much does.
And if you extend it to around about the 30 hour point, it absolutely does.
So OK, there's a little bit of a Gray area there.
But more or less what we're saying is that all of the extra hypertrophy stimulus produced by the
three set myoptrate elevation area under the curve compared to the one set myoptrate elevation area
under the curve is happening in the 1st 24 to 36 hours.
Now if you then instead of the Schoenfeldt use the Peland, which I don't like doing because it shows
some rather odd results when you get to the top end of the dose response curve.
But if you accept that the lower end of the dose response curve is not horrible, then then you're
dealing with maybe 2 1/2 times as much hypertrophy as one set, you know, And then you're starting to
say, well, actually maybe there's a bit of an extension of duration in terms of the hypertrophy
stimulus period from doing higher volumes.
And again, that doesn't sit right with me.
It doesn't make sense.
But ultimately, if you do want to do that and you do want to argue for that, what you're going to
find is you get back down to baseline around about the 42 hours.
Now if you say that you've obviously got some kind of the damage that's pulling away from that,
you've got to extend that a little bit longer and you might end up at 48 instead.
But again, ballpark figure what you're ending up with is inside of that 48 hour window, you're
ending up at the bottom end of the spectrum sort of 24, sorry, 30 to 36 hour hypertrophy stimulus
period estimate.
If you use the Schoenfeldt metro analysis, which I think is probably better in terms of getting to
the right number.
And the reason for that I think is because the top end of the pellam metro analysis is skewed
upwards because of muscle swelling caused by very high volume training.
If you look at the, if you use the pellam Metrolis, you can end up with 42 hours at the minimum and
probably more likely 48 if you accept that there is some damage pulling away myops in that later
part of the curve.
So I think you can actually use one set versus 3 set analysis to get very precise answers about when
you're likely to see the hypertrophy stimulus period ending.
But the important thing is it actually stacks perfectly with everything we've talked about already.
So the difference between long and short rest periods, difference between high and high repetition
ranges, and now the difference volumes.
Everything actually fits and tells you that the hypertrophy stimulus is probably sitting around 36
hours and volume doesn't really lengthen it, unless that lengthening is associated with damage
repair.
I don't think there's much I want to add to that in case anyone wasn't familiar with what you were
saying at the Schoenfeld and Palin.
So that's just, we talked last week about the, the diminishing returns of volume and they're the two
volume meta analysis.
And so they're looking at, well, you can start to get an idea of how much more stimulating
additional sets compared to 1 set.
And you're saying that the, the two meta analysis do disagree with each other a little bit in the
magnitude of that.
And you're saying, well, a?
Little bit, quite a lot.
They're really, really, really big differences.
But they do both show diminishing returns.
That's not negotiable, right?
So they do tell us that each additional set is less stimulating.
And you're saying, well, if we looked at three sets, it's somewhere between the Schoenfeld one was
what, 1.6 compared to?
I think so a single.
Set how many it was and then the Palin one was 2.5 compared to a single set.
And you're saying regardless of which one we go with that magnitude of increased hypertrophy
stimulus that seems?
Is happening within sort of 42 to 48 hours, absolutely, definitely.
And in the case of the Sherfield, it's done with by maybe 30 hours or so.
So, you know, there's, there's no need to speculate that higher volumes are dragging the hyper
stimulus out longer.
Because if you do that, you can't explain why you, you literally can't explain what the extra myops
is doing in the 1st 24 hours.
It's like you say, oh, well, no, we think that the higher volumes are dragging out the stimulus
period for 72 hours.
I'm like OK well tell me what this Myops rate elevation is doing in the 1st 24 hours.
It's.
Unallocated.
It's not.
You've got unallocated myops.
It's like, how are you getting higher myops in the 1st 24 4 hours and also longer maps that that
doesn't stack with the dose response data we've got.
So it's really cool, basic, very simple arithmetic calculation that you can do, you know, literally
at home with a piece of I actually did it.
I actually did it on this back of this envelope here when I with a piece, I did the use the
trapezium rule and just did it with a, with a pen and a ruler.
And you can do it literally with the data that's available.
So very, very simple calculation to do.
You can just estimate how long you think Myops is going to be elevated for, assuming that first day
is just doing hypertrophy and not doing damage repair, which as I say is a very defensible position.
It's really not easy to criticize that when you've got tons of non excise muscle injury data showing
that there's just nothing happening in that first 24 hour period.
So potentially there's a little bit of this grey area in that sort of between the the 24 hour
period.
Absolutely yes.
You're saying if anything were falling on this side of 48 hours and it's.
Yeah, absolutely.
I would say if I, if I, if I were to, you know, use Occam's razor and say what do I think the
simplest possible answer is to this phenomenon?
I would say the vast majority of the hypertrophy stimulus is happening in the 1st 12 hours.
There is a fat tail that comes down to about 30-2 ish, 30 to 32 hours.
And I would say by 36 it's probably back down to baseline.
That would be my expected result.
If we had Star Trek type, you know, level of technology where we could just kind of point a scanning
device, a muscle and see exactly what was happening.
Yeah.
In that scenario, I would expect that profile to happen.
The peak 12 hours and over and done with and fat tail down to probably around about 30 to 36.
I don't think there is much happening after that point.
Anything after that point I would say would be muscle damage repair.
And I don't think the volumes would change the duration.
I think they would literally just change the magnitude of the peak in the 1st 12 hours or so.
Maybe a little bit of the fat tail leading up to the 36 hours point.
I'm being very, very generous and trying to be as open as possible about the calculations and the
possible likelihood of numbers being different.
I don't think the pedal and matter analysis is correct in terms of its dose, response curve, slope.
I don't like the fact that it continues into Infinity at the top end of the scale with very high
volumes.
That's just physiologically impossible.
So I'm, I don't think that's right, but I'm trying to be as open and as kind of clear as possible
and what I'm doing in my calculations so people can see whether they would come to a different
conclusion, which is cool.
You know, everybody can form their own views.
It doesn't bother me what other people think particularly.
I'm just doing this because as I say to you, when we have personal conversations, I'm doing this
because I find it interesting.
You know, if other people find that useful, that's fantastic, but it doesn't bother me if they find
if they disagree with me, that isn't important.
Now you've potentially opened a huge can of words which are not going to go into here, but that is
if a lot of that hypertrophy similar is done within 24 hours, people are going to be asking, well,
hold up, can I train again in that 2436 hour period?
We're not going to do that here.
But the question I have is you started this by saying we need to consider this question because if
we're looking at full body three times a week up or lower repeated twice a week, we want to know how
many days of atrophy essentially I'll be experiencing.
So based on what you said there, So what is the implication of of all of this?
I think people probably are going to, and obviously we both study what happens on social media just
from a academic point of view and because it impacts on what we do and also just because it's
fascinating how human beings behave.
So of course there will now be people who argue that we should be training every 36 hours.
And I've already started to see some of that popping up in my questions on social media.
I'm not going to go there.
I'm not going to go there.
I, I really don't want to go there.
I mean, I was dragged kicking and screaming into saying that full body every other day is better
than full body three times a week because technically, physiologically, it has to be.
I'm not going to train like that.
I like to go to the gym on the days that I like to go to the gym.
I'm not changing my behaviour, but obviously some people are competitive and the edge might make the
difference for them.
So I have to be intellectually honest and say I don't want to train like that.
I don't like training like that.
I'm not even going to program like that if I write a program for somebody.
But I have to be intellectually honest and say it is probably better than what I am programming
because physiologically it's better.
Ultimately, we build a model and then we have to be, we have to accept what the model answers tell
us.
We can't just build the model and go, I don't like the answer, so I'm going to now change the model.
Why did you bother then?
I mean, it's like just do what everybody else does and just form opinions and ideas based on what
you want to do.
It's like the whole point of building the model is to find an answer that you wouldn't have got to
just by feeling the answer, you know, So you want to feel the answers.
I like training like this.
Therefore, it's the right answer.
OK.
Which that's what everybody else does.
We're not doing that.
What we're trying to do is figure out how things work and then look at what the answer tells us and
then go, OK, well, does that mean that, you know, full body every 36 hours would actually be the
secret sauce to the next Mr. Olympia?
I highly doubt it, but it's just like you have to be intellectually honest and say, well, yeah, that
might be an answer.
That is an interesting thing to have a look at.
No, I mean, it's the difference between what's probably optimal in in physiologically determined
situations and what's optimal in terms of your personal kind of preferences.
Not going to be necessarily the same thing.
We've just got to have the ability to hold those two things in balance in our heads and go, this is
the answer on paper and because of these reasons, and this is the answer in practice because of
these reasons.
And I can hold that tension without having a kind of meltdown about it because, you know, you're
able to do that.
And I think that that's an important skill set.
But yeah, I do expect there will be people running around saying, yeah, Chris said that we should
now train every 36 hours, you know, instead of full body every other day.
I don't honestly know, but I'm just telling you what I think is physiologically going on.
I.
Don't recall they said this last week, but some of the old school like the, the silver guys actually
did have that conversation about how often to train in, in terms of, you know, the optimum time
period.
And some of them, and I believe I've read Steve Reeves talk about this, actually did try to space
their workouts out in a similar fashion.
So it'd be like like Monday afternoon, Wednesday morning and actually talked about doing it exactly
like that.
And obviously the expectation was not everyone can do this, but if you can, this is one way of doing
it.
And Bob Hoffman, in the the program we looked at today, he also talks about that you could do this
every other day.
And you know, that would be a perfectly good way of doing it, except that that means you would have
to work out on Sundays every other week, and people didn't necessarily want to do that.
It's very cool to see we repeat this often in this podcast, and I hope we'll continue to repeat
this.
It's very cool to see that when you remove the effects of anabolics from a anecdotal experience, you
learn so much more, you know, and those guys had the opportunity to learn an enormous amount without
the confusing effects of the anabolics and without the confusing effects of social media.
And they were able, therefore, to which I actually kind of filter out, to be honest, as you well
know, but you can kind of get this perspective and see just how much knowledge they were able to
attain and how much, how close their practices were to what we're talking about physiologically.
I'm just endlessly fascinated and, and, and just, I just enjoy seeing that that connection between
those two things, which is ultimately what this podcast is designed to do is to share our
appreciation of these two phenomena and show how close they are.
And just how cool that is for cutting through the nonsense that you're going to see on social media
today when people are talking about things that have absolutely nothing to do with either how people
have trained for hundreds and hundreds of years or even thousands of years.
We go back to ancient Greeks and ultimately how people we can construct A physiological model today
to explain how Hypertroor works.
You know, those things are ultimately so close together.
It's just, it's just so fascinating and enjoyable to.
Talk.
So ultimately in a nutshell, the the most effective way to train would be to train as soon as
possible once that stimulus period is over, assuming recovery has occurred at that time point.
And you're suggesting that based on everything you've gone through today and and the available
information we've got that seems to be this side of two days?
Yeah, it's in that 36 hour.
My, my, my personal bet is on it being around the 36 hour point.
If it were to be 4042, I would not be surprised.
I do not see it going beyond 48 hours.
Anything else you want to conclude with or should we wrap up for today?
I think that's been a tremendous second episode.
I had great fun.
I really hope people were able to follow most of not all of that.
I know that I'm sure there'll be people asking me questions to clarify my messages over the next
couple of days, but that's part of the process.
So yeah, I think that's that's good for today.
Exactly, thank you guys for joining us.
Like, comment, subscribe, all the good stuff and hopefully you'll join us again next week for a new
episode.