Episode: 009 Work capacity - what it is and how to improve it
URL: https://open.spotify.com/episode/2fouXU2Dwd17Hgu6WKFFpz
Published: 2025-07-20
================================================================================

Welcome back, everyone, to another episode of Hypertrophy, Past and present.
As always, I have Chris with me.
Good morning, Chris.
I was just asking you whether you'd eaten, because I know there's a concern that maybe it'd be too
early for you, but you have a full belly, don't you?
I do.
I got down to breakfast in my hotel and I've got back again and I've set up and everything looks to
be running OK.
So fingers crossed we will have no disruptions to the Wi-Fi.
And I was going to ask if you've had your morning coffee, but you don't drink coffee.
I've had my evening coffee, so hopefully that'll keep me nice and alert and let's jump into it
today.
I've got a interesting plan, a plan that's a little bit different to anything we've gone over so
far.
And when I talk to people about some of these plans or when I get feedback about some of these, one
thing I hear a lot is man, how long would those guys be spending in the gym?
You know, I often get this sort of critique where it's like I don't have time to do that.
Who can spend 2 1/2 hours in the gym?
You know, I don't AI don't have the time to do that BI don't have the the capacity to do that.
I couldn't possibly do something that long and exhausting in a session.
And there's this idea that the these guys with the silver area had this unlimited work capacity and
could do all this extra work than what people can do today.
And we're going to talk about that a little bit.
And we're going to talk about why what I've just said doesn't really make a whole lot of sense.
But I'm going to leave you guys hanging until Chris jumps in and does his part.
So before we get there, let's talk about the plan.
Now, this plan is it's from a guy named Alan Stephen.
Now, he's not one of the more well known silver area lifters, even though arguably he maybe should
have been.
He has an amazing physique, but he did win Mr. America multiple times.
He won Mr. USA as well, who's a win in the in the late 40s up until the the early 50s.
And this is an it was a gym owner as well.
And what's cool about that actually is he used these methods with hundreds of clients and he says
thousands of clients.
And so not only was he getting real time feedback on himself, but with multiple other people as
well.
So you could see what was working and maybe what wasn't working.
So I like that sort of component here where we can actually see, you know, I guess feedback from
hundreds of people as to what kind of methods were working and obviously understanding that all
these people were natural at this point in time in the late 40s, steroids didn't exist or they
weren't being used by in in bodybuilding.
So we've got good anecdote here as to what kind of things were working.
So this is what he referred to as a bulking routine, which again is a term that a lot of these
silver area lifters use and basically just used to talk about gaining weight.
And then they sort of shifted more into a defining routine, which would usually consist of more
exercises.
And this routine was part of AI guess, part of a series of routines.
Now, one thing that is pretty common in these types of routines is I'm sure you guys have noticed
when I've talked about these is they tend to do the same exercises each workout.
That's almost always the case.
And they'll do the same exercises for that workout, for that routine, and then they'll move on to a
new phase.
And typically you see these phases tend to last anywhere from about 4 to 12 weeks on average.
Obviously there's some variance to that a little bit.
And then in the new phase, they do use some new exercises.
Sometimes they'll usually what they'll do is they'll keep the type of exercise and they'll do a
slight variation.
So they might go from like a stiff leg deadlift to maybe a bent knee deadlift or something like
that.
But they generally will keep the the moon pattern relatively similar.
So this was part of a A4 part series of his and this was the first routine of that four part series.
Now the instruction for each exercise is the same.
So lead with that.
And what you did is you warmed up to use the 10 repetition Max load and warmed up with it.
And then you established your five repetition Max.
And what you were to do is perform any number of sets, any rest period, whatever you needed until
you got 25 repetitions out.
So whether that was five sets of five or however you wanted to do it, he did say say that you would
probably only be getting a couple of repetitions out in your final set.
So we're probably talking 678 sets until you get to those 25 repetitions.
Now the first exercise was a standing barbell overhead press.
He then went into a floor barbell press with an arch, so essentially a bench press with an arch, but
they did this on the floor at this point.
Then he did a bent over 1 dumbbell row, then a barbell clean or barbell cleans and then a flat
neutral grip chest press.
And he emphasized keep it elbows close to your body.
And then he went into a barbell squat and then finally a deadlift from block.
So essentially a rack pull.
And he did say to do this above knees.
And from memory, I think he actually did instruct to do this with your knees locked out as well.
So it's essentially A stiff leg rack pull above knee height.
So that's the workout plan. 25 reps of each and we're talking, let's say it was about seven sets per
exercise to get to the 25, then we're talking about 50 sets across the workout.
And he did say to expect it to take you at least 2 1/2 hours.
So what do you think of that?
A.
Routine is really interesting.
Obviously, as you said before, it's very, very different from what we've been talking about
previously.
Two things really.
We've got an exercise selection, which is somewhat different, and we've got a Rep set structure,
which is also quite different.
In terms of the Rep set structure.
It feels a lot more like the Hepburn type of stuff that we've maybe mentioned in passing before.
I mean, ultimately Hepburn doing 8 sets of three with a kind of A5 Rep Max is probably very similar
to what we're seeing here.
It's a lot of work to be done.
I mean, I think doing that for 2 1/2 hours with all of these exercises is a real mission and not
something that I would be interested in following it.
Or I think that Hepburn with sort of two or three exercises is doable.
Hepburn or even, you know, this Alan Steven type routine of seven exercises would be really, really
brutal.
I don't know how many times he was thinking of doing this per week, but I mean, I'm guessing it was.
Probably 3 * a week.
But it's it's really, yeah, really, really a lot of work.
But as we've talked about, and this is nice to be talking about this now when we've, you know,
previously described the difference between Rep ranges and recoverabilities.
Because working with that five Rep Max, you know, it's interesting that he'd probably be capable of
doing this three times a week because of the enhanced recoverability from heavy loads compared to
moderate loads.
So again, you know, it's really interesting to connect this with what we've talked about previously
because ultimately it probably is recoverable, you know, on a muscle by muscle basis, I do think
people will feel very tired at doing this kind of work.
But from a fatigue point of view and a recoverability point of view and a training point of view, I
think it actually would work.
Now, if somebody's listening to this and they don't understand the difference between feeling tired
and fatigue and strength recovery, then they need to look at the FAQ or any other resource that
we've provided or I've provided in the past and understand the difference between just feeling tired
because you're doing a lot of exercise and actually recovering from a workout on a fatigue basis.
Because fatigue is not the same thing.
A fatigue refers to strength and the recoverability of that strength from a workout that we've just
done on a muscle by muscle basis in terms of excise selection.
I mean, I think this is really interesting because I've, I've grumbled before about how we don't see
enough deadlift variations.
I've crumbled before that we don't see very many row variations necessarily.
Really nice to see a row variation and also this deadlift in the program.
Pressing obviously is very well sort of catered for in this program.
Obviously we don't have a wide grip pull down or a pull up.
I really always going to say that I don't see why we wouldn't have that.
Cleans are interesting because it kind of probably does the job, does the job of the shrugs that we
would probably want to see.
Other than that, obviously the major things that are missing are things that probably wouldn't have
been available like knee extensions, like girls, that kind of thing.
And of course, very much very obvious is the lack of single stuff, curls, triceps extensions, calf
raises, that kind of thing.
And I'm guessing, as you've explained before, that's simply because these bulking routines were
designed to create a large stimulus across a large amount to the body and they would then shape with
those single joint exercises in subsequent programs afterwards.
That's exactly right.
And even within the context of this bulking routine, he actually does add single joint exercises
later on.
He does add in I believe both a biceps exercise and I think he does like a.
They call it like a triceps curl, which is essentially like a skull crusher, so that does appear
later on as well.
I've, I've said everything I can say about this routine really, I mean, the, The thing is, as we go
more into these routines and it becomes easier and easier to add on and explain, connect with things
that we've talked about previously.
So really for me, the, the interesting things about this routine are simply the set Rep structure,
which is very different from previous ones.
It's much, it leverages the heavy load kind of possibility for doing more volume, essentially more
stimulating repetitions and each workout and of course the excise selection which is sort of tighter
and smaller than we might expect in a perfect routine that covers every single muscle region in the
body.
So, you know, yeah, really interesting to to work through this, really.
One point I want to finish on with this is.
I find it interesting when sometimes you see people using heavier loads like this in this routine.
Often there's like a deemphasis on how many reps you do specifically.
So here where he's like, hey, use your five Rep Max, I don't really care how many you do, you're
going to get to 25.
What's interesting with that is you would predict that you actually going to end up with the same
outcome, however you get there.
And it's interesting that these guys seem to identify that, whether they cognitively knew it or
what.
But that's what the Physiology, that's what the Physiology would predict, isn't it?
That if you're using A5, you have Max load.
Whether you do them all as singles, or you do them as fives, or you do them as double s, it doesn't
really matter, does it?
Exactly.
I mean, again, the stimulating Rep theory basically says that if you're working with A5 Rep Max, you
can do whatever you like.
You can do singles, you can do double S, you can do triples.
It doesn't really matter.
The hypertrophy stimulus is going to be the same.
However you structure that and that is absolutely being leveraged by these guys.
So yet again, we're seeing a connection between the silver era anecdotal, sort of the anecdotal
structures or anecdotally based training methods are connecting now with the physiologically based
training methods that we're describing.
And it's always the way.
I mean, we see that connection so many times across so many different examples, and yet again, we've
seen it here.
So 2 1/2 hour plus workout, that's obviously a, you know, pretty decent effort.
And I introduced this workout by saying that a lot of people are going to complain about what
someone's work capacity must be like to achieve this.
And you're about to tell me, and rightfully so, that that's a nebulous term that doesn't really mean
a whole lot, and we need to unpack it.
Aren't you?
I am.
So I'd like to take the opportunity today to explore what work capacity actually means, because
people are using it without defining it.
I think what we have to do if we want to use the term work capacity is define exactly what we mean
by it because the person that we might be talking to isn't necessarily going to hold the same ideas
about that term as we do.
So I'm going to give some options and then we're going to unpack each of those options.
The first option I would like to give is that when we say work capacity and somebody says, Oh well,
it's the amount of work that you can do in a workout and recover from.
OK, fine.
So what you're describing there is the maximum recoverable workout volume.
So you get to the next workout that you have planned and you've already recovered from that.
Now the problem there of course is that as we've just been talking about, if you use heavier loads,
you can do more sets, more stimulating reserve than you can if you do lighter loads.
And so there's a little bit of difficulty there.
But fundamentally, all things being equal, yes, you could argue that certain, you know repeated that
effect related adaptations could get you to be able to do more of that and recover in time.
So first, first possible definition of work capacity is just recoverable workout.
You actually don't need the term work capacity in that context.
You could just say the amount of volume you can recover from in a workout in time for the next one
that you have planned.
And that's going to be muscle specific, isn't it?
Absolutely going to be muscle specific.
Now the next possibility is, well, how much work can you do in a set period of time?
Now, the reason I'm saying in a set period of time is because one of the worst possible ways that
you can think of work capacity is to just say, well, it's the amount of work you can do.
No, you can't do that because you can literally just sit in the gym all day long and do an extra set
and an extra set and an extra set.
And it's just adding, you know, technically you're increasing your work capacity by having more
patients.
Well, that's a garbage idea.
So you can't, you can't do that.
So if somebody says, well, work capacity is just the amount of work you can do, just laugh at them
and move on because they don't, they haven't thought about this.
Work capacity can mean the amount of work you're doing in a set period of time.
Two things that we need to just define here very quickly. 1 is that there are going to be two
different measurement methods for how you can sort of calculate the work capacity in a, in a, all
the work done in a fixed period of time. 1 is absolute and one is relative.
Absolute means that you're literally just working with numbers of kilograms or or pounds or
whatever.
And you're saying how much, how much work can I physically do numerically with this amount of weight
or you know, whatever amount of weight.
So it's work, it's volume load.
So the amount of weight on the bar multiplied by the number of sets and number of reps you can say,
OK, how much work can I physically do in the hour with the absolute amount of weight?
And alternatively you can do relative.
Now relative just means relative to your maximum strength, you instead of working with the kilograms
or the pounds, you work with your of one Rep Max.
It's like, well, how many reps can I do with my current percentage of 1 Rep Max.
Now, the reason that we have these two separate metrics is because the absolute doesn't take into
account the increases in strength gains.
So if you get stronger, then automatically your work capacity will increase.
Your volume load that you can lift in a given hour, for example, will increase even if the number of
reps that you can do with a given percentage of 1 Max doesn't change.
In contrast, your what we call relative muscular endurance or your relative work capacity will
actually, you know, sort of take that into account because it uses the percentage of warmer Max at
the time when you're doing the workout.
So it accounts for your maximum strength gains.
So you've got these two totally separate concepts. 1 is influenced by maximum strength, the absolute
value, and one is not influenced by maximum strength, the relative value.
So what we're seeing here is that if you want to get at work capacity as a concept independent of
your gains in maximum strength, because honestly, why would you, why would you want to incorporate
maximum strength into a definition of work capacity?
Because ultimately you already know what your maximum strength is.
You don't need to incorporate it into a separate calculation.
If you want to do that, you're going to end up talking about relative muscular endurance and that is
then going to be talking ultimately about fatigue resistance mechanism.
In summary, what I'm saying is we've got three separate things to think about.
We've got work capacity, which is just how much work you can recover from, and that is basically the
repeat about effect and the mechanisms associated with that.
Secondly, you've got absolute muscular endurance, which is going to be a combination of maximum
strength and essentially your fatigue resistance.
And then finally, you've got this third concept, which is relative muscular endurance or relative
work capacity.
And that is ultimately literally going to be the isolated fatigue resistance concept.
So three things that we could use to define work capacity.
What you can't do is just say work capacity is just the amount of work I can do and then stop
talking because that that isn't a valid thing.
So recoverable volume, like you said, we've talked about this plenty in this other podcast, we've
gone into that.
And then the second one, the absolute work done, I can't see really any utility to that as a metric
It's but well, at least not from a hypertrophy perspective.
Is there any reason one would be concerned about that?
Ultimately it's a composite measure and that's, that's really the important starting point if you
want to talk about absolute muscular endurance, for example, or this absolute work or the volume
load, which is an absolute measure.
Automatically you're, you're describing your impact on the external environment you're describing.
For example, you're describing how many rocks of a certain weight you could lift and carry from one
side of the room to the other.
It's, it's your influence on the external environment.
It's not actually going to have, as you say, any impact on your capacity to produce hypertrophy, for
example, because that you could be doing almost no stimulating reps in that scenario.
I mean, it doesn't, it doesn't really impact on adaptions particularly.
It's, it's describing your impact on the external environment.
So if you have a, if you have a pressing need to dig holes in the ground or build structures in the
wilderness or anything like that, then absolute work capacity, absolute volume load or absolute
muscular endurance is a really interesting thing to measure because it is describing your ability to
lift and carry in and all of those things.
So if you're a kind of a survivalist and you're interested in those kind of concepts and your
ability to basically be a living forklift truck, then yeah, that is interesting.
That's vanishingly tiny number of people are going to be interested in that and they're probably not
listening to me talking honestly.
As you say, absolute muscular endurance is a composite measure of maximum strength plus fatigue
resistance.
And it only really tells you your impact on the external environment.
It's not really telling you anything about your adaptations that you're gaining from a particular
type of exercise.
OK.
So let's talk more about relative muscular endurance then.
So I want to know, is this something that we should be concerned about?
But even before we get to that point, kind of can we we train to change it.
Like tell me more about it.
Yeah.
So when when we measure changes in relative muscular endurance or relative work capacity or relative
volume load or anything like that, what we're doing is we are taking a given percentage of 1 Rep Max
at the beginning and end of a training program.
So let's say for example, you take 70% of your one Rep Max at the beginning of the training program
and you do as many reps as you can in a bench press.
That's a very simple relative muscular endurance measure that is isolated to a single set.
And at the end of the training program, you do exactly the same thing.
You measure your new one Rep Max, you calculate your new 70% to 1 Rep Max, and you do again as many
reps as you possibly can.
Now what you're going to find is that number doesn't change that much, not in comparison with
absolute muscular endurance, which would be, you know, saying, OK, at the beginning of the training
program, 70% to 1 Rep Max is 70 kilos.
I'm going to do as many reps as I come with 70 kilos.
And then at the end of the training program, I'm going to come back and do this again as many reps
as I come with 70 kilos.
Problem is at the end of the training program, hopefully 70 kilos is now only 60% to 1 Rep Max
instead of 70%.
And of course, I'm going to be able to do more reps because it's now a smaller percentage of why one
Rep Max.
And that's why absolute takes, you know, fails to take maximum strength gains into account.
And you end up with a composite measure of both your strength gain and also your fatigue resistance.
If you measure as many reps as you can, with this 70% being different as an absolute number at the
beginning and end of the training program, you get a relative measurement which then only measures
changes in fatigue resistance.
Now you can do this with volume load.
Instead of doing a single set with 70%, you could do five sets with 70%.
So you get a volume load, relative volume load instead of a relative muscular endurance on a single
set measurement, you could do percentage drop offs from one set to the next.
So you could do five sets and you could say how much does my strength or my number of reps decrease
from one set to the next.
And you could do an average reduction on the number of reps you get from set to set.
Again, as long as you take the percentage of your maximum strength at the point when you're doing
that muscular endurance test or that volume load test, they're relative measures and they take your
strength gains out of the equation when you're measuring that fatigue resistance.
So there's multiple ways of doing this.
The most common way is the single set, as many reps as possible with a percentage of your maximum
strength at the time when you're doing the test.
So that's the one we tend to talk about.
But you can use work more, more work capacity sort of type measurements where you take volume load
for the whole workout or the number of exercises that train a particular muscle or whatever you want
to do.
So just because I'm talking about relative muscular endurance as being a single set of sets to
failure, it doesn't mean that this is not relevant to work capacity.
If you're thinking of work capacity as being a whole workout's worth of sets, the concept is
identical.
You're literally just talking about multiple sets or single sets.
So that's the measurement that we would go about using, all the measurements that we would go about
using, and that is the essence of the adjustment that we need to make.
It's the adjustment in maximum strength from the beginning to the end.
As I said, many times that you take these measurements, you find that they don't really change very
much particular if you do for example heavy load strength training with 5-6 Rep Max is that kind of
thing, you will find it often doesn't change at all and it can even reduce slightly in these single
set measurements.
In contrast, if you use moderate loads, it tends to drift upwards a bit and if you use lighter loads
it tends to increase quite a lot.
So what we're seeing is that if you want to increase fatigue resistance, you kind of have to do
higher repetition sets.
So literally at the moment, just talking about observing the adoptions occurring, I'm not describing
what the adoptions are and whether we want them.
I'm just describing the fact that they do happen and they do tend to happen with that type of
training, not so much with heavier load or even, you know, the the moderate heavy load type.
Yep.
So just to clarify, just to, to reiterate what you said there.
So if someone's predominantly doing, you know, we often talk about four to 8 repetitions per set as
an example, then you're saying that at the end of that training block, assuming that they're using a
relative percentage, so they've used let's say 80% of the one Rep Max at the start of their training
blocks or how many reps they could get.
Then they do it again 12 weeks later and you're saying they're predominantly using these heavier
loads, heavier to moderate loads.
There's not going to be much of a change in the repetitions they can get with again 80% of their new
one Rep Max.
Correct, it's likely to be quite a small movement upwards.
If it is a movement upwards, it could even be a small movement downwards.
Or it could be no change at all, but it's really not going to be a substantial positive improvement.
You might see, as I say, substantial improvements with more moderate loads at the top end of that
range, 8:00 to 11:50, you're highly likely to see positive improvements if you're pushing things up
to 15 plus.
So what we're seeing then is it's Rep range that seems to be the primary driver of whether you get
fatigue resistance changes in these situations.
So even if someone were doing like in this workout plan that we talked about at the start where he's
doing 7 sets per exercise or whatever it is of of lower repetitions, you're saying that if someone's
doing 7 sets compared to doing one set of say 5 or 4 whatever, just by doing more sets, you're still
not going to increase that relative muscle endurance.
So this is the really, really important point for this kind of podcast, I think, which is that a lot
of the time when people message me about work capacity and I asked them to think about the
definitions of it and what they're actually saying, they will often argue to me that the reason they
are doing higher volume training programs is because they want to increase their work capacity.
If you define work capacity ultimately in this way of saying, well, is it increasing my relative
muscular endurance?
Is it increasing my ability to do more work with my current maximum strength levels?
The answer is volume doesn't really have anything like the same impact as Rep range.
There's only a minimal number of studies.
I've only found one study that measures the effect of volume, workout volume on changes in relative
muscular endurance and it didn't find a significant effect.
There was a small numerical effect.
There's no actual significant effect and that isn't what we see with the Rep range effect.
Rep ranges absolutely start doing light the loads.
You're going to see some big shifts in relative muscular endurance.
So again, the idea that doing more volume increases your work capacity, if we define work capacity
as being essentially improving fatigue resistance isn't substantiated.
It's not what's going on.
Rep range is where you want to go if you want to do that.
And then you start to realize that people don't really want to do that.
They just want a reason to do higher volume training.
So what we're seeing then is that the higher repetition sets are producing fatigue resistance
adaptations.
Now before I mention this, I just want to clarify that if you look at changes in absolute muscular
endurance and relative muscular endurance over a a period of time and a training program, what
you'll notice is that absolute muscular endurance carries on increasing indefinitely.
And that's because strength carries on increasing indefinitely.
If you're measuring how many reps you can do with 50 kilograms, it's going to go go up forever as
long as your strength goes up because you're making it a smaller percentage of your one Rep Max
every time you go back in the gym.
In contrast, relative muscular endurance or fatigue resistance tends to increase or improve for
about four weeks or so, maybe be a little bit longer.
So we see a very limited amount of adaption that you can generate of that particular quality.
So it does look like the fatigue resistance adaptations, which I'm going to go on to explain in a
moment, are actually relatively limited in, in that duration, at least in comparison with the
adaptions that underpin gains in maximum strength.
OK.
So the adaptions that underpin this improvement in fatigue resistance are obviously going to be
related to individual fatigue mechanisms.
So you've got the 2 central nervous system fatigue mechanisms, supraspinal and spinal, and you've
got the two categories of local fatigue mechanisms, metabolite and calcium iron related.
If we look at the central nervous system spinal CNFT, we've got very little data on how it changes
over time.
Just have to kind of say we don't know supraspinal CNFT.
We've got data showing that people can improve their ability to tolerate the pain of things like
metabolite burning sensations and cardiovascular sensations and stuff like that.
So it does look like you can train yourself to accumulate more metabolites in the muscle at muscular
failure with a given repetition range.
And that tells you if you can tolerate a higher degree of metabolite in the muscle, you're getting
better at that pain tolerance and you're improving the amount of or you're reducing the amount of
superspinal CNFT that you're going to suffer as you're doing that particular exercise with that
higher repetition range.
So we do know that you can start to reduce the amount of superspinal central nervous system fatigue
by tolerating pains is better in local terms.
You've got calcium related team mechanisms and you've got metabolite related team mechanisms.
Well, if you change calcium related team mechanisms, you automatically change post workout fatigue
because that's the repeat about effect.
Repeat about effect is gigantic from workout one to workout 2, like 2010 to 20% of that size from
workout 2 to 3:00 to 4:00.
And after that it's pretty much nonexistent.
So ultimately you're not going to see much of an impact of calcium.
I'm both demagnetism, but they do exist.
I mean, you can see that happening, you know, through the repeated BAT effect in terms of metabolite
related fatigue, well, that's really improving stuff like buffering capacity, You're changing the
ability of the muscle fibers to handle the accumulation of metabolites and you're going to see
improvements there.
And that's probably the majority of what we see in this fatigue resistance effect in the first kind
of three or four weeks of the training period.
I would say metabolite related T is probably the major player.
It's getting better, but it has a limited lifespan in terms of how much of that you can actually do.
Importantly, just finishing off while we talk about these mechanisms, if you change something that
affects A hypertrophy adoption, then that's a positive thing.
If we're thinking about bodybuilding.
If you change something that doesn't affect hypertrophy adoption, it doesn't matter.
Now, metabolite accumulation doesn't affect hypertrophy stimulus as long as it doesn't cause
superspinal CNS.
The fact that the majority of our fatigue resistance improvements are metabolite related means that
this isn't really changing our ability to create hypertrophy.
The stuff that does is the calcium ion related fatigue mechanisms which affect mechanical tension
and the supraspinal CNFT that affects the Motrin accruent.
So at this point somebody might say, well, OK, that sounds very positive.
So if I train to improve muscular endurance, relative muscular endurance by increasing my fatigue
resistance, I can establish a situation where every time I do a strength training set, I can enhance
the hypertrophy stimulus?
Well, yes and no.
Yes, if you're talking about training with light loads, because the metabolite accumulation to that
degree that causes pain and suffering only actually happens in light load sets.
If you're doing heavy load search, you're not getting that problem anyway, so there's no need to try
and seek the adaption that makes a problem go away that you're not experiencing.
So yeah, if you want to train with light loads, then training with light loads will get you to a
point where you can minimize the negative impact of training with light loads in producing
superspinal CNFT.
But if you're only training with heavier loads and moderate loads, that's not a problem anyway.
So it doesn't, it doesn't exist.
The calcium I related fatigue stuff is going to go away no matter what you do.
The repeated artifact happens however you train, so it doesn't really matter whether you're training
with light loads, heavy loads, or manual resistance.
So you get to the same place.
So ultimately the fatigue resistance adaptations do tend to happen with the light load training, but
that's not going to help you enhance the hypertrophy stimulus that we're trying to get to.
So this is, I guess a really important point because there's a lot of people who argue that we
should include light load blocks in our training programs in order to get advantages that then
enhance our ability to stimulate hypertrophy.
Or they don't because all you're doing is mitigating fatigue mechanisms in some ways relating to
calcium.
I related fatigue is going to happen irrespective of how you train.
And in some ways related to superspinal fatigue, which only effects you if you're training with
light loads anyway.
So it doesn't get you anywhere interesting in the small number of scenarios where an athlete might
want to have a little bit of extra muscular endurance, relatively speaking, to their maximum
strength.
Sure, you know, that's, that's relevant.
I mean, you might want to go training for that.
The way to do that is training with the lighter load Rep ranges.
It's not doing more volume with heavy loads that isn't going to get you the adaption you're looking
for.
So when people think about work capacity, so I will define what you mean.
If you mean doing more work in less time and you want to improve your fatigue resistance, more
volume is not the way to do that.
More higher repetition ranges is the way to do that.
So if you're using these lower repetitions and you've outlined some of these mechanisms that's going
to allow one to be able to do a few more repetitions at the end of a higher Rep set.
Well, those mechanisms like you said, they're not going to improve the lower repetition set.
So you're not going to get more hypertrophy benefit out of them going back to lower repetitions.
And it's not necessarily going to make the high repetition set superior than the low repetition set
either.
Because ultimately what you're doing, you're kind of working from a deficit to begin with with the
low repetition set because you've got all these extra metabolites and the Afrin feedback and these
negative sensations.
So all you're doing is kind of effectively removing some of that deficit, but it's not going to make
it more effective than if you were just to do lower repetitions in the 1st place, is it?
Exactly correct.
That's exactly what we're talking about.
By using a lighter load, a higher repetition range, we put ourselves at a disadvantage training for
the ability to suffer those painful sensations to a greater extent.
We can get rid of some of that problem, but we don't get rid of all of it.
So you're never going to get to the point where you're equal with the Motena recruitment levels that
you could get with a heavier load where you don't have those painful sensations ultimately.
So yeah, it's just you're removing some of the problem.
You're not removing.
All.
So from a hypertrophy perspective, we would be interested in being able to increase how many sets
per muscle one can do in a session.
And as you've mentioned before, that's repeated that effect and that's going to happen either way.
So we're not going to train specifically for that.
And then the other thing I guess that would beyond per muscle volume that would be interesting from
a hypertrophy perspective would simply be how many different muscles and sets we can do within a
single session.
And we've kind of covered that a little bit in the past, haven't we?
But that's sort of, I guess people would sometimes think about that when they talk about work
capacity as well, wouldn't they?
Yeah.
So let me answer the first question and then come on to this more interesting one.
Second, in terms of the repeat about effect, the repeated BAT effect is going to happen regardless
of how we train.
The only scenario in which you could change the magnitude of the repeated BAT effect, because the
repeated BAT effect is muscle fibre specific, you could apply it to a larger number of muscle fibres
by doing eccentric overload and you could expose all of your muscle fibres to that calcium ion flood
from eccentric contractions.
The problem is that when you've done that, obviously it creates a large amount of post workout
fatigue.
So you don't want to train like that all the time.
But when you stop training like that, it goes away and you've got kind of like maybe 4 weeks before
it goes away completely.
So we were talking before this podcast about, well, could you kind of engineer a scenario where you
did one really horrible eccentric training workout once a month and that would give you this really
big repeat about effect?
Yeah, you could think like that if you want to go down that route that's starting to get really
quite technical.
But you know, that just I'm just alerting people to the fact that, you know, the repeat about effect
is muscle specific.
You get a bigger repeat about effect from eccentrics compared to concentrix because you get this
massive flood of calcium mines.
That's only the really that's the only real difference you're going to see between training
variables is this eccentric versus eccentric overload versus conventional strength training.
And again, bodybuilders are not training like that because it just creates massive amounts of post
workout fatigue and it's really, really inconvenient to set up and do and you know, kind of
implement, but just wanted to flag just for completeness, that is a possible scenario that people
could think about.
But honestly, practically, it makes no sense.
The more interesting kind of question then is, well, OK, what about if we're doing multiple muscle
groups?
What about this idea of, and as you already pointed out, we talked about this with a previous
podcast when we said, well, maybe we want to split a full body routine that's massive into upper
lower and do it on alternate days.
And that's just because you just physically feel like you're getting just exhausted by being in the
gym for two, 3-4 hours, whatever it might be.
That's a cardiovascular issue.
Now it's a cardiovascular issue do because ultimately you're creating this this cardiovascular
demand every time you do any muscle group and that then metabolite is being produced, you're going
to clear that and it's a whole body phenomenon.
If you really push that, you're going to find that you end up creating superspinal fatigue because
you're out of breath, you feel horrible, you've got metabolite accumulation lactate in the
bloodstream and it just makes you miserable and reduces your maximum central motor command for the
maximum tolerable perception of effort.
So you end up with your back end of your workout with those exercises suffering and not training the
muscles very effectively.
Cardiovascular capacity is the driver, is the determining factor in, which is different from what
we've just described.
When I've described these changes in local muscular endurance, I've described what's happening
locally to the muscle in something like a bench press or a squat, or actually the cardiovascular
component in the squat is definitely present, but like a knee extension or something like that,
you're doing as many reps as you can.
It's not really about cardiovascular capacity, it's about what the local muscular fatigue mechanisms
are going to be.
If on the other hand, you're trying to do like, you know, something like you've described today with
this workout with seven exercises and you know, probably 7 sets per exercise is, you know, colossal
amount of work, you're going to find that cardiovascular capacity is going to limit your ability to
be successful in those final exercises of the workout.
Otherwise, routine equipment's going to be on the floor and you're going to be doing nothing of any
value.
Cardiovascular capacity allows you to recover between sets of different muscle groups.
That's the important things.
When we're moving away from local muscular endurance, where we're talking about the muscle being the
limiting factor, we're now talking about the cardiovascular system.
Because if your cardiovascular system can clear out the metabolites of the exercise you've just
done, then you can bounce back and you can do the next set with something completely different.
You go from bench press to deadlift and that pull down and whatever.
And if anybody has worked as a personal trainer or a strength coach and they've worked with, for
example, endurance cyclists, they will know what this looks like.
These guys will literally do an exercise of say, you know, 5-6 reps of squat, which if you did it,
you'd probably discover quite quickly that you're breathing very heavily at the end of that set of
reps and you needed some time to recover for the next set.
These guys will be bouncing back in 2 minutes, you know, and they'll be doing equally going to
another exercise and something else and they bounce back and they bounce back.
And it's just that the cardiovascular system clears everything so fast that they don't have that
limitation that those of us who don't do that kind of exercise to the same extent experience.
Now, just for completeness, again, how do you improve cardiovascular capacity?
Well, basically the standard, the gold standard way of improving cardiovascular capacity is just to
do long, slow endurance exercise.
So, you know, build a foundation.
And I'm not, I'm not, I'm not a cardiovascular physiologist by any means.
I just, I have done endurance cycling.
I know how it works and I know enough about how the body works to be able to connect that with my
understanding of the science.
You know, basically you don't need to do intervals.
You don't need to do, you know, anything silly like that.
You just do, you know, a couple of hours a week of long, slow cardiovascular activity.
Ideally, if you want to mix that with your strength training, you want to do minimal muscle damage.
So, you know, the bike is the fantastic way of doing that.
Across trainers will do that.
You know, there's various ways of making it happen, but ultimately running is probably the worst in
terms of mixing with strength training because you're getting a lot of footfalls, a lot of muscle
damage.
You're going to find interference effects.
I'm not saying it's impossible.
You can absolutely do it, it's just it wouldn't be the way that I went about it if my sole purpose
of doing that exercise was to improve cardiovascular capacity for strength training.
I'm not going to do running because it's like you're kind of you're kind of rubbing yourself for
other reasons by creating that extra muscle damage.
I would go down the cycling route all across trainer or something like that.
And as I say, you're just doing like long, slow, easy cardio.
And if you do enough of it, then your cardiovascular system starts to improve.
Now, as you get into it and you from advanced, you can start to play around with slightly more,
slightly more intense levels of cardiovascular activity.
But honestly, that's icing on the cake.
The real factor that determines your cardiovascular capacity is just the volume of time you spend
doing that easy, slow cardio.
So for people who are really confused about how to improve cardiovascular capacity, which I just
find astounding, but if you are, that's how you do it.
It's just long, slow cardio.
That's what you need.
To work.
So from a high pressure perspective, I know obviously a lot of people listen to this podcast.
That's what interested in from what we've talked about today, that's probably the main factor that
we could actually influence that would have some bearing on the hypertrophic response of a workout
you've talked about.
Well, obviously repeat about effect is going to come along kind of no matter what we do.
So you don't need to worry too much about that.
These bouts of of high repetition phases, you've kind of dispelled the necessity of doing that.
That's not going to particularly help someone from a hypertrophy perspective.
So if one was interested in quote, UN quote increasing one's work capacity or insurance really the
type of insurance that's going to help us, there would be cardiovascular insurance.
Yeah, absolutely.
So I would say including three sessions of cardio a week.
If you are the true obsessive and you want to have everything absolutely perfect in your training
program, then you would do your strength training workout and you would do your cardio afterwards.
That's miserable.
It really is miserable.
It's it's one of the most miserable things that you can do.
In my experience, much more enjoyable is to pick a very the non muscle damaging form of cardio and
do it on the off days like cycling, like cross trainer, something like that.
That is not perfect because it means that you're a little bit closer to the next workout and you
will have some muscle damage.
But honestly, if you keep the intensity low and you avoid the the the impacts by doing something
like cycling or cross training, you won't have as big a factor.
So my recommendation would be just to alternate between strength training and long slow cardio.
And you can do that indefinitely as long as you are careful.
As I say, it's.
Only the total obsessives with, you know, crazy degrees of self-control and the sort of dedication
who are going to try and get the incremental slight benefit by, you know, putting the cardio
straight after their strength training.
I do not recommend doing that.
It really is miserable.
Just plays havoc with your kind of ability to to sort of maintain that program in the long term.
I think honestly alternating between strength training and cardio in that in that format is probably
the best way of doing it in practice.
I used to do 55 minutes.
After my weight session, and this is back when I was training 6 * a week and I felt like my stomach
was going to eat itself after I'd done the 55 minutes of cardio.
It was such an uncomfortable experience.
It is a very, very.
Horrible experience.
I don't I don't recommend it at all.
The only scenarios that I've ever managed to combine strength training and endurance exercise on the
same day have been when I've been on group endurance cycle rides.
And that's simply because when you're in a group ride and you're on the road, you've got a lot of
other stuff to actually keep your attention on.
You know, not as you say, the fact that your stomach is trying to eat itself.
It's like your brain is doing other stuff rather than rather than thinking about how miserable you
feel.
So but yeah, so the the true pathway to work capacity improvements is actually endurance exercise.
It's not really any of the kind of ways that people claim is the route.
For example, doing higher volume strength training workouts is not going to get you there.
Cardiovascular exercise is going to get you there.
Hopefully that's cleared up a little bit of the confusion.
Around work capacity and the necessity to do some of these things depending on what your goal is.
Obviously, like you've mentioned, if your goal is as an athlete and injury and athlete, that's going
to be a little bit different.
But from a high perspective, hopefully that's giving you guys something to, to think about.
And I know, you know, in my own experience, I've tried all these things I've done the phases of, of
high repetition sets because I thought that's what I needed to do And I've, I've in the past, I've
steered away from cardio because there's been that mentality that cardio is somehow going to kill
your gains.
And as you've talked about, it's ultimately coming down to muscle damage, and we can do intelligent
things to mitigate that muscle damage.
I'm guaranteeing now.
But hopefully that's given you guys something to think about, some ways you're going to implement
some of this stuff into your own plans, into your own programs to enhance the efficacy of your
workouts in the gym.
As always, we hope you'll join us for another episode next week.