Episode: 012 How to build muscle with isometric training
URL: https://open.spotify.com/episode/0M8MZRdfvafFc7KsyUuIhu
Published: 2025-08-11
================================================================================

Welcome back everyone to another episode.
Thank you all for joining us.
Chris, how are you today?
I'm doing very well.
Thanks, Jake.
Yeah, good to hear.
So we have AI guess you could say this might be our first episode where where it's sort of like
audience suggested topic.
So a lot of you guys have asked about this particular topic and that is why we are covering it
today.
I'm not going to give away what it is, but it's probably going to going to become quite obvious when
I talk about the Silver era workout plan in a moment.
But I do want to say thank you guys for your suggestions.
I've had a few people give me suggestions over the last week and we do appreciate it.
We of course appreciate you guys sharing and commenting and doing all the good stuff, subscribing.
So please continue to do all of that stuff.
So today I'm going to introduce us to a not a full workout, but just a bit of, it's sort of like a
specialisation, I suppose.
And last week we did talk about a specialisation phase.
And this is, I suppose, another form of a specialisation phase.
And this is actually coming from John Grimmick.
Now I think I would have mentioned John Grimmick in the past on other episodes, but I don't think
we've talked about one of his plans yet.
And we will at some point go into plans in more detail.
This is just a specialisation part, but Gimmick was very, very important when we look at the Silver
era.
So he was the first Mr. Universe back in 1948.
And in fact there's several very interesting things about John Gimmick.
So first Miss Universe, he won multiple Miss Americas, he competed in the American Olympic
weightlifting team in 1936 and the story of how he did that is very interesting.
I actually find this, you know, people look at bodybuilding today and there seems to be this kind of
dichotomy where like, well, you know, bodybuilders aren't that strong.
And if you look at the silver area guys, they were the strongest guys on the planet.
And you know, the story of grimmer competing in the Olympics, like he wasn't even preparing for
that.
He was doing his bodybuilding, weightlifting stuff, just being a strength athlete.
And then essentially in the lead up to the Olympics gets a gets contacted by Hoffman being like,
Hey, basically, we we need you to join our team.
And he was strong enough just in his normal day-to-day training that he was able to step into that
role.
You know, we see people obviously, like we've talked about Ridge Park in the past in a second person
to, to bench 500 lbs and, you know, obviously a bodybuilder by trade.
So the silver area guys were incredibly strong.
You know, the idea that strength and muscle was separate like that just didn't compute.
Anyway, I'm going off on a tangent.
So 1936 Olympic competitor and the other interesting thing with Grimmick, so he was part of the York
club.
So we've talked about Hoffman quite a bit so far.
So he was one of Hoffman's guys and he was potentially one of the first, at least based on the
documentation.
We have one of the first American bodybuilders to actually experiment with steroids.
Now this was documented in 1954 as part of a, a group of of lifters at at York York Barbell.
And it's worth noting because people might be like, well, why are we talking about Grimmick then?
But Grimmick was 4044.
I think he would have been 44 thereabouts when he experienced experimental stories with York.
So he'd given up competing half a decade earlier.
All of his competitions that he'd won were were done well and truly before he he experimental
stories.
And by all accounts, in fact, the first experiments actually didn't even work.
They got a stack of side effects and no benefit and apparently boarded the experimentation.
And then a year or two later, that's where D Ball hit the market.
And that was obviously more successful.
But nonetheless, John Grimmick does come up quite a lot if we look at the history of of the silver
era.
Now this plan or this specialization phase I'm talking about, I will admit that this was published
host steroids.
But as I've said, Grimmick had finished competing well and truly by that point.
And he talks about this as as a method that he used to build his arms.
And he does say that when he was writing this, he says that people now are talking about high
volumes and they're talking about doing thousands of curls.
And that's what he's talking against.
He says, no, no, that's not how we did it.
It was stuff that got you strong.
And he talks about using this at the end of a workout.
So as you know, I sort of discussed last week with specialization phases, often they would take out,
say the exercises for that particular muscle from a normal full body workout and then add this
either the start or the end or sometimes even on separate days.
So that's what what Grimmick was suggesting with this for for specializing in in arms.
And what he suggested doing was getting a barbell and setting up a power rack and setting up the
barbell in the power rack.
So it's it's up against pins.
So it's a movable and in at a 30° of elbow flexion, 90° and 150° doing a Max effort, 5 second
isometric in each position, just a single 5 second isometric and then and resting between each set.
So he could give Max effort to each set.
And then he suggests doing the same thing for an overhead press and setting it up at eye level, at
hairline level, 6 inches above the head, and then two inches before lockout.
And once again, doing 5 second Max effort isometric as high as you can, resting between each set and
doing the other positions.
So that's the first we've talked about isometrics, at least on this podcast.
In any of these plans, Chris, what do you have to say about those?
Well, I think it's absolutely fascinating.
We've got some really, really good stuff here.
You know, I think it's very close to a perfect an example of a, an isometric training program for
hypertrophy.
And I think there's, there's a couple of things I want to kind of draw out here, at least three, if
not 4.
So First things first is using maximal effort contractions.
I think that's important to to reiterate and not using sub maximal ones.
So making sure we get a very high level of Moto equipment there.
Secondly, he's not overdoing the duration of the contractions.
We've got 5 second contractions.
Really, really interesting because actually that is the standard duration for a maximal isometric
contraction in research studies.
So that goes to show just how nailed down that is as a as a practice.
And also we've got these different joint angles.
So we're getting different regions of the muscles or different muscles within a group being
stimulated.
And then finally, the volume is actually quite low.
So, and I know you've already made that point, but you know, I think it, it deserves to be
reiterated that they're not talking about doing a ton of, you know, kind of low quality contractions
here.
This is designed to be high quality work that is increasing recruitment, increasing, you know, kind
of the hypertrophy in very specific areas of the muscle.
I think it's a really, really good an example of just how dialled in those guys were.
Yeah.
And we're going to talk more about ways that one can implement some of these things.
And, and you know, obviously this is an example of that and we'll talk about how we've done that in
our own programming a little bit later on.
But to begin with, let's unpack what exactly is happening.
Like what, why would someone do isometrics like this?
Why would someone you've mentioned 5 seconds, Why?
Why 5 seconds?
Like let's actually unpack this topic.
Well, let me, let me start by answering a because obviously, as you said at the beginning of this
podcast, we're doing this topic because people have asked us to.
And in doing so, in asking us to cover this topic, they have actually sent us a whole list of
specific questions relating to all of these issues.
And I've just kind of got an order that I think works to to run through these.
So let me just insert one topic before I answer that question, which is, can isometrics actually
cause hypertrophy?
And if so, how are they doing that?
Because that's like the preamble, that's like the background to all of this stuff that we're going
to be covering.
So the stimulating reps model is not about numbers of repetitions, as I've said before, it's about
physiological reality.
How is muscle growth being stimulated?
And the stimulating rights model tells us that we stimulate muscle growth on a whole muscle level by
point A or starting at the beginning, achieving a high level of muscle fiber activation, by which I
mean a lot of muscle fibers are activated.
Now we do that by recruiting a high level of Moat units, a lot of Moat units, and that allows us to
activate a lot of muscle fibers.
So step one, Step 2 is then we have to apply a high level of mechanical tension to each of those
muscle fibers.
Even today I'm seeing people saying things like, oh, well, you know, if I devote a high level of
effort to this contraction, I'm going to feel a really high level of tension in the muscle.
And that's telling me that I'm experiencing hypertrophy.
That's just not how hypertrophy works.
Hypertrophy is a muscle fiber phenomenon.
You're not going to be able to feel what's happening at all.
What's actually important is that each individual fiber experiences a high level of tension.
Now, how does it do that?
It needs to be moving slowly.
Well, in a slow concentric, obviously we're moving slowly.
But some people look at an isometric and go, well, we're not moving, so I'm not moving slowly, so
I'm not getting this.
Yes, you are.
So the static state, the zero velocity is basically just as good if not slightly better than a very
slow moving velocity.
So the active myosin cross bridges are creating a high level of single fiber tension at 0 velocity
in the same way that they do at a very slow concentric velocity.
So essentially the isometric is giving you automatically that very slow shortening velocity and that
then paired with a high level of effort, which is why I mentioned Grimex, you know, kind of focus on
maximal efforts being important.
That is again critical for the other side of the equation.
So basically in a maximal effort isometric, we are essentially getting the same thing as we would
get in the last couple of repetitions of a heavy or any strength training set really, but it's
focused on heavy loads because that's what we talk about.
You know, you get a heavy load or a moderately heavy load, you're basically getting the same kind of
experience from your isometric as you are from those last stimulating reps of a set if your efforts
are maximum.
So essentially that's how isometrics cause hypertrophy, in exactly the same way as a heavy the
strength training set would do.
That's a really interesting and important point where you've talked about because people will look
at this and be like, well, you know, based on force velocity, if there's no movement, then that's
not doing what it needs to do.
And as you've just said there, no, what we're talking about is the, the, the cross bridging between
the actin and myosin.
And he's saying that even at that point of no actual movement, there's maximal cross bridging that's
occurring.
So that that is a misconception I see a lot online where people are thinking, well, if there's no
velocity at all and nothing's moving, then there's no tension.
No, no, no, that's not how that works.
Exactly.
And ultimately what's important is to start with the physiological reality and then interpret that
from an understanding of how Physiology works.
I think what happens is people come at this space from different, you know, trajectories, different
directions, different backgrounds, and they don't understand what actin and myosin are doing and
they just hear force velocity and they just interpret it in a way that isn't actually correct.
If we start from physiological reality, we can see that an isometric contraction is doing exactly
the same thing as a slow concentric.
So you could literally just treat them from a physiological point to be the same.
Now we'll get into some differences in a minute because that was your question.
But ultimately the starting point is that yes, isometrics will cause hypertrophy and they'll do it
in exactly the same way as a dynamic set done relatively close to failure.
So the question you had for me was essentially, you know, what's, I think it was what's different?
Was that correct or was it a slightly a different direction that you were taking at that?
Point Yeah, I was just what are the parameters?
You know, you've talked about 5 seconds and Max effort.
So what's actually and you've explained a little bit what's happening.
We're still getting this cross bridging, but there's there's more to it of it as.
Well, there is, there is.
So ultimately putting this in context, we can say that if the isometric is behaving much like a, a
dynamic, then ultimately you can start with what we know about, which is obviously heavy strength
training or moderately heavy strength training done to failure.
And we can go, OK, well, if, if a moderately heavy strength training set done to failure or a heavy
strength training set better still at 5 repetitions, if A5 repetition maximum takes about sort of 12
to 15 seconds to be a completed.
I'm just thinking about the concentric phases because the eccentrics aren't really doing very much.
But if you just time the concentric phases of A5 Rep Max, you'll around about get to somewhere
between 12 to 15 seconds.
So you could, let's say, well, OK, the whole of that set is stimulating hypertrophy.
It's an entirely separate conversation about whether every single Rep is equally stimulating or
whether we can even judge the stimulus based on the time or anything like that.
But let's assume we can for this conversation, then you're probably going to find that approximately
10 to 15 seconds worth of isometric injections get you to about one sets worth of hypertrophy
stimulus more or less.
You could argue that the isometric would be slightly better if it's done with the way that Grimex
don't.
It might be slightly worse if you do it in a way that's not quite so good.
I'll get on to that in a moment.
So ultimately, if we now translate that back to Grimek.
10 to 15 seconds worth of of high levels of mechanical tension is what we're looking for there.
Exactly.
Now if we translate that back to Grimex and say, well, OK, so he's doing these, I think it's three
separate contractions at three different joint angles.
For the biceps it was and I think for the overhead press it was 4.
It was 4.
So essentially he's getting about somewhere between a set and maybe a set and a half depending on
how you slice it.
So it's definitely a full set, at least a full set, and maybe a little bit more depending on, you
know, as I say, how you judge it.
But definitively, it's clearly a good set there.
So he's getting one set and a bit from each of those efforts that you're doing, which is a really
solid kind of addition to something that because you said you're doing this in addition to what
you're already doing, you're only adding one extra set.
Really, it's just a very judiciously segmented set where he's training different parts of the
muscle.
Now the important thing about the five seconds is that if you look at the way that fatigue
mechanisms build during isometric contractions compared to dynamic contractions dynamics, you get
these little reset points between repetitions.
Now in isometric, you don't necessarily get that unless you do what Grimek has done, which is put
them in.
So by putting these 5 second contractions in and saying, well, I'm not going to go longer than 5
seconds, you're creating the equivalent of a essentially final Rep of a set somewhere between 3 1/2
and 5 seconds long.
Now, if you don't do that, if you just go, I'm just going to do 1015 second contraction.
What you're going to find is that the spinal central nervous system fatigue starts to build quite
rapidly and starts to chew away your ability to create recruitment at the muscular level.
Even though you're experiencing a high level of effort at the end of the set, you, Oh no, I'm
pushing as hard as I possibly can.
Your recruitment levels have actually dropped quite a lot and ultimately that is then
disadvantageous.
You're starting to pull away from what you were hoping to get and you're not going to get the same
stimulating effect.
So that's why these 5 second injections are just so much more valuable than allowing, you know, kind
of 10/15/20 2nd injections to come into play, I'm sure.
You're going to tell us about what it is fatigue wise that's causing that.
But just from a practical standpoint, I don't know if people listening to this have ever given
isometrics ago, but if you haven't, you know, going to a gym, set up a barn in a movable position,
do a curl against it.
And you'll find that 457, maybe 8 seconds.
Like you can feel that you are actually really, and I, I don't mean Max effort, but you're, you're
able to really like you can, you can feel how much force you can create doing that.
And then you keep going, do 10 seconds, do 15 seconds, and you feel like you're doing Max effort,
but you can intuitively tell this is nowhere near as much force that you're able to reduce at that
point.
Yeah, proprioceptively, you can tell that the the external impact of your effort is no longer what
it was, you know, and I think that's a really important point.
I mean, it's, I think it takes a little bit of, you know, thinking about to get to that, that level
of perception, but you know, it's definitely happening.
So ultimately the fascinating thing about spinal central nervous system fatigue is that it's been
one of the most well, and I say well researched in a qualitative sense, not a quantitative sense.
You're not going to find 100 studies on spinal CNS fatigue, but you are going to find probably 10
absolutely brilliant ones.
And the sad thing is that the way that research works is that you are trying to falsify hypotheses.
And unfortunately, these guys have done such an amazing job that they've falsified every single
hypothesis that they've tested.
And so they've done some absolutely remarkable work in a objective sense, in the sense that they've
quality of their work is just unbelievable.
I'm, I'm, when I read the papers, I'm like, these guys absolutely know what they do, and yet they've
falsified every hypothesis that we've had so far in this area.
So at the moment, all we really know about this process is that the longer the activation of the
motor neurons or the recruitment of the motor neurons goes on for, the more the motor neurons start
to resist the transition of that electrical signal to the muscular level.
So essentially it's like you start sending electricity down the spinal cord motor neurons to the
muscle to recruit the motor units and activate the muscle fibers.
And little by little, as time goes on and you're still doing that, the ability of the motor neurons
to transmit that information starts to get throttled and it gets smaller and smaller and smaller and
you get a smaller output for the input that you're putting in.
Why is that happening is an absolute mystery.
But as I say, not for want of trying.
There's been some really great work done on this.
It's just unfortunately, it hasn't borne through.
And interestingly, actually from a just a philosophical typical point of view, you might take a step
back and go, you know, maybe that would happen more in other areas if the research was actually as
good.
You know, maybe we'd find more negative results if people were putting the same amount of dedication
and, and, and care into their.
And a care I think is the right word here, because you can kind of see that every step of the way,
as they're going through their papers, they're documenting what they've done and they're explaining
to you how they've done this experiment.
You can see that they've actually put a lot of thought and care into each step of the process.
So many research papers you look at and you can just think that people have just thrown something
into a, you know, kind of a rough shape and gone, Oh, that'll be good enough.
Let's run with it.
Whereas these guys, the quality of their work is extraordinary.
And yet they've not managed to find a a result that is helping us expand our well, you could argue
that they've found some things that are not true, and you could say that's helping us expand, but
it's not helping me build a model because it doesn't give me anything positive to work with.
Yeah, that's really interesting.
Hey, like it even, just as you said, philosophically, it gives a different spin to what we see when
we look at research papers, doesn't it?
And I know from like, from my perspective, there's a lot of papers that look at and I'm like, why
are you doing it like that?
Like that, just the method that you've chosen fundamentally means the outcome doesn't really matter
because it's not even assessing what this issue is you're seeking to assess.
So to see people, as you said, they're taking care and actually constructing how this goes, that's
really encouraging, isn't it?
It's tremendous, but a lot of the stuff that's pure Physiology does tend to attract that type of
approach.
The further away you get from pure Physiology and the closer you get into things like, you know,
hypertrophy research, the worse things tend to get.
You know, I think there's, there's, there's like pockets of, of quality here and there, but the
hypertrophy research is not renowned for those pockets of quality.
So what do we know about the fatigue mechanisms then?
So what we know is that the spinal sin fatigue is going to be more rapid if you allow your isometric
contraction to go on for longer.
And that's, that's the important thing.
So what we can do is we can split up the isometric exactly the same way that Grimmic has done and
go, we're just going to do 5 second contractions.
We're not going to try and get our entire stimulating Rep, you know, dosage and then go, we're not
going to do a 10/15 second contraction.
We're going to do 2 or 3, you know, sort of five second contractions or however you want to do it.
And that's, that's going to be the best way of doing so in practice, actually very simple solution
to avoiding the problem.
We don't need to worry too much about that.
Just remember, you don't really want to be doing 10/15/20 second contractions in an isometric state
because by the time you get to the end of that, the recruitment levels at the muscular level have
dropped quite a long way.
And that's before we even talk about what's happening at the Super spinal level, where you might be
starting to lose motivation or getting, you know, a negative.
Conversation.
Do we know how long 1 needs to wait for that to dissipate?
So this is a really interesting question because the dissipation of CNS fatigues is, it is quite
controversial for a number of reasons and it's also plagued by a little bit of methodological
difficulty now in recent years that's been unpicked to a certain extent.
So what we've got now is an understanding that there is a very quick recovery of a large chunk of
both spinal and superspinal CNST as soon as you finish the contraction, but it then goes non linear
and you get this kind of long tail happening.
So unfortunately, once you've done something that is a maximal effort, you know, for a few seconds,
you probably are going to see a chunk of both superspinal and spinal CNST lasting for, you know,
probably a couple of minutes.
But as I mentioned a moment ago, big chunk of that does pretty much go within the first kind of
minute or so.
Now, I've just been looking at this a little bit more recently.
I've been trying to pull together some studies that I've not spent so much time looking at and
trying to gather a picture.
And I think really, you know, standard rest periods are pretty good at getting rid of most of this
problem.
I think 3 to 5 minutes is pretty much, you know, a good rule of thumb for these kind of things.
I've just saw a study which showed that there was still some CNSP even after three minutes, but I
think most of it is recovering at that point and it is mostly gone.
But with five seconds, I think we're we're really minimizing that.
I mean, most of these studies that measure superspinal and spinal synthetics tend to use much longer
duration contractions even, you know, like a minute long or something like that.
So I think realistically with five second contractions, we can probably take a minute and we'd be
absolutely fine.
I don't see there being a problem after about a minute for those kind of situations.
And to be honest, if you're setting this up like Grimmick is describing and you're setting up
different height situations, you're probably going to need a good 3045 seconds anyway just to reset
yourself.
Yeah, that's what I, when I do use these methods in my own training, that's what I do is I, I don't
often if I was doing just dynamic sets, I would be waiting longer.
I would wait that's sort of 3 or 4 minutes.
Whereas here I'll set up a new position that'll usually take me probably 4560 seconds.
And after like if you're setting up positions, you have to unload and then load them.
And so it is a little bit time consuming and then I would go again.
So that's probably going to be, you know, maybe 6075 seconds give or take.
And because it's generally speaking, there's not going to be much cardiovascular demand with these
types of of sets or you know, isometric sets anyway.
Maybe if you're doing a squat, perhaps.
But generally, if we're doing overhead tracing, bicep curl, stuff like that, it's not going to be
overly demanding, is it?
No, I think it really is going to be mostly spinal CNS fatigue.
And as I say, that really does come zooming back down after the end of the set or the end of the
repetition or the contraction and you're just kind of dealing with a long tail after that.
And I think a minute probably is, is a good compromise.
Nobody wants to be, you know, waiting 3 to 5 minutes between a 5 second isometric contraction.
You know, I think, I think one minute is, is definitely the right ballpark there.
I wouldn't go less than that.
You know, I'm, I'm kind of stuck in an environment at the moment where I'm playing around with
isometrics because I don't have access to a very good gym.
And I'm finding that the minute really does make a difference if I do an isometric and I like to
just have a walk around and and get my head straight again before I do another one.
I think it does help.
But you know, obviously that's practical, more anecdotal approach rather than the physiological.
So what else are we going to be aware of fatigue wise?
Anything else?
So the other thing to be aware of is that, and actually I didn't mention this when I was looking at
the routine and it's just occurred to me to go back and check what order he did his the contractions
in.
So I'm assuming that 30° is a contractor position and that 150° is the extended elbow position.
I'm not sure.
I haven't seen any photos so I'm not sure.
The overhead presses the other way around.
Yeah.
But actually not that stretched.
He's starting at shoulder, which is, I mean, I guess that is quite stretched to be honest if he's.
Yeah, fairly.
So the important thing is that when we look at different joint angles, we are going to experience
fatigue mechanisms that are specific to muscle length.
Now the more contractor position you go, the more metabolites you're going to get and they are
totally and utterly innocuous.
Really the more stretched you go, the more calcium ion fatigue you're going to get.
And that is problematic.
So realistically, I would always start at the contractor position and work my way down to the
stretch position in that order because you're going to have a the conflict between your stretch
position and your contractor, but you're not going to have a contractor position impact on your
stretched.
Now let me just jump in and predict a point of contention that we might see in the fitness industry
as a result of me saying this.
Yes, you can find studies showing that contractor position isometrics cause more absolute fatigue
than stretch position isometrics.
You can find those studies, they do exist.
That's not what I'm talking about.
The magnitude of the fatigue is totally and utterly irrelevant.
It's the fatigue mechanism that matters because metabolite relative fatigue doesn't reduce
mechanical tension anywhere near as much as calcium amylative fatigue, and it doesn't last very
long.
So if you've got metabolite relative fatigue there, you will dissipate it within a few minutes and
you can get on with whatever else you want to do and there's no problem with that.
What's your mind relative to fatigue?
Once you create it, you're stuck with it until the following day or the day after or whatever.
It just doesn't go away.
So we'd always want to do the isometrics in the order of contractor down to stretched.
And then of course, bear in mind if you're combining this into a workout with other things, just
bear in mind that your isometric stretch position contraction might then 'cause you issues for
something that you want to do afterwards.
If it's a dynamic, if you're doing isometrics first, just think that Grimek has talked about doing
this at the end of a workout.
As an addition, when I program isometrics in athletic contexts, if you're using a relatively
contracted position or even a mid range contraction, you can throw them in warmups.
They're really cool to throw in warmups because they really don't create very much fatigue at all if
you do them in this way that we're talking about here.
So obviously if you weren't.
Doing any other exercises for that muscle wouldn't particularly matter if you were doing.
No, not at all.
No, if you're doing this as a replacement then it doesn't matter you, but you just do them in the
order of contractor down to stretched and that's and that's absolutely fine.
Now with five second contractions and leaving a minute or so between contractions and only doing a
handful of them, I don't think it's important to worry about the stretch position causing optic
calcitomino fatigue because it's not.
I'm just pointing out that optimizing the workout in, you know, for the best possible result, we
would always do them in that way.
How stretched must that position be to exponentially increase the calcium ion fatigue mechanism?
So I think really contracted down to mid range.
So the top half is probably OK.
Anything in that bottom half is probably where you're going to have to start thinking about it.
So I would just look at your joint angle range of motion and go top half.
I'm kind of free range, do what you like.
Bottom half, you're going to have to start just being aware that there might be an issue.
And again, this comes back to if people want to volumize a little bit, then volumize with the top
half of the range of motion.
I'm sure we're going to get into this at some point, but I just want to put it out there in case
it's not something you're planning on covering.
So obviously we've dispelled the myth around the the velocity.
The next biggest objection I see to isometrics is once someone understands that, they say, well,
hang on, no, no, you need to work through the entire range of motion.
You need to provide tension or stimulus or I don't know what they would argue throughout that entire
range.
Obviously we've just seen with Kremic that he did do these different positions.
I don't know that's something you're going to cover with another point, but I just wanted to put
that out there.
Yeah.
So basically isometrics are going to follow the principle of neuromechanical matching in the same
way that dynamics do.
So when you look at when we analyze A dynamic strength training exercise, the way we approach
looking at it is we go, what's the most difficult part of the movement?
Where do I experience peak effort?
Another way of talking about it is to say that where is the sticking point, but basically wherever
you feel the peak effort point in the range of motion, that's the point when you know Motena
recruitment is going to be highest.
And that's going to correspond then to you're going to look at that a point to the range of motion
and go which muscles or muscle regions are doing all of the work at that particular point.
Now the isometric is doing the same thing, but you're freezing the joint angle and you're saying I'm
only going to work at that joint angle.
So if you've got a dynamic movement with a very clear point in the range of motion, which has peak
effort and you've got an isometric peak effort at the same point, you're going to see a very similar
pattern of hypertrophy.
Now the dynamic will be a little bit messier.
It'll be spread a little bit more kind of around the edges across other areas that are related as
you approach and leave that point in the joint and range of motion.
But the isometric won't, it will be much more kind of literally whatever fibers have best leverage
at that exact point are going to be the ones that get the most stimulus.
So the isometric is kind of really fine tuning and isolating a much, much smaller region of muscle
area than the dynamics are doing because they're kind of muddying the water a little bit.
If you muddy the water even more where you get a very, very flat resistance profile, you're going to
basically just spread the stimulus across a bunch of different places.
So ultimately the magnitude of diaper is probably going to be quite similar, although differences
depending on I mean, one thought that I often have is, well, if you have a like a pure isokinetic,
then you're going to spread the hypertrophy across all the possible areas that you could because
you're using Max efforts and everywhere is going to get an equal kind of stimulus in that scenario.
If you've got an even distribution of motor units from a different threshold across the whole muscle
group, then what you should see is that you actually get slightly better hypertrophy.
Now, this has never been seen in research, so I'm a little bit kind of twitchy about this, but you
should actually see a little bit more hypertrophy across the in terms of total muscle tissue because
you're targeting all of your highest threshold Moto unit muscle fibers, all of the fastest fibers.
If you just hit one little area, there's quite a decent probability that a bunch of those mussifiers
that you're training there are actually capped out.
They're plateaued.
So even though potentially you could get the same hypertrophy, if you were a beginner, you would.
But if you're in advance, then your hypertrophy capacity here is here, but you've got that same
chunk across the entire muscle if you do a accommodating resistance, very isokinetic style
contraction.
Is this making sense?
Yeah, let's work through the overhead press as an example here and the he performed because I think
that will maybe illustrate this a little bit more clearly to people.
So throughout that, like let's say someone is doing that dynamically and they're not doing any
isometrics and you've mentioned this litmus test of where's the sticking point.
So let's say someone's doing an overhead press and have a sticking point in that more bottom
position.
So for them, they're going to be getting more middle delt stimulus and they would be say, anterior
delta triceps.
Yeah.
And so one would potentially make the argument of what I hear online is, well, no, we need full room
for the this maximal hypertrophy stimulus.
But in fact, let's say you were using this exercise and you were wanting some anterior delt
development, then arguably doing the isometric in that singular position where the anterior delts
has better leverage.
So closer to that top position, that's actually going to be better for hypertrophy for that part of
the muscle than doing this dynamic repetition.
Now, you've then given an example of a flat resistance profile where there's no sticking point,
where basically the entire repetition ends up being a sticking point.
And you're saying that if one were able to do that, then what?
Then each wherever we see this transition to another muscle or region having better leverage.
Well, each of those regions are going to get this maximal stimulus.
Yeah.
But it's obviously in a dynamic contraction, you pass through that point relatively quickly.
So you're getting this tiny stimulus applied to a very large range of different areas of muscle in
contrast to the isometry, which is giving you more depth rather than width.
Now the point I'm making is that if you're a beginner, then it's not going to matter because you've
got capacity to grow everything and you're just going to get, you know, depth from width doesn't
really matter.
You get the same kind of stimulus across usable stimulus across everything that you're doing.
But if you're a Vance lifter and you've only got a tiny bit of a capacity to grow, then what you're
going to see potentially is that the, the isokinetic might give you a little bit of stimuli.
I mean, that's across everything.
Whereas the, the isometric, the dynamic with a with a very strong sticking point might literally
just be giving you this tiny little bit of capacity to grow because everything below that is just
not really capable of growing.
The other, the other side of this issue, you know, giving aside the fact that we don't generally
have access to accommodative resistance of that nature, the isometric is really still very
interesting for the advanced person because you can literally target things that you may not have
been targeting before.
Now the example you gave obviously is the, you know, the overhead press.
If you've got it's typically the sticking point below the horizontal, you're going to find that
you're always just trained in the middle of the adult with that exercise.
You might find that doing some isometrics above the horizontal, it produces some really interesting
results, you know, in terms of anterior adult development, which you maybe not able to have, you
know, or maybe you don't have the equipment to be able to do otherwise so.
It's a very interesting method that one could think about for some of these exercises where there
are different muscle regions that actually contribute differently at different points in that
repetition.
Yeah, absolutely.
I mean, I think the isometrics is a really, really cool way of doing things that you might not
otherwise be able to do.
So I've got to remember we're always comparing stuff to our standard strength training exercises
because that's what 99% of people are doing.
You know, 9% of people are going to go to the gym and they're going to use whatever resistance
profile is available to them.
Yes, there are like a tiny number of people who have access to isokinetics and they do play around
with those things and they, you know, kind of are able to do that, but most people aren't.
So we've got a situation where we're talking to a group of people who are using standard strength
training equipment.
They aren't going to be able to have that perfect resistance profile.
So isometrics are really interesting for them because they can look at their existing resistance
profile and they can go, OK, so my sticking point is down here, if I do some isometrics up here,
then I'm going to be targeting stuff.
I'm just not targeting with this dynamic exercise.
So you've got your overhead press, whatever and you notice that it's really difficult to the bottom.
Great.
Keep doing that and we'll put some isometrics in that are higher up and that then kind of gives us
some growth we're not getting elsewhere.
And I think that's the, I mean, in one respect, you could say, well, is the Grimek approach overkill
in the sense that, you know, he's kind of scattering across the whole muscle.
What he could do is look at what he's already got in terms of dynamics and go, well, I'm kind of
already covering those parts, the range of motion with my sticking points and these dynamics I could
just do my symmetrics in parts, the range of motion that I'm not already covering.
So you could take it a step further and try and maybe do a little bit more in the areas that you're
not covering, a little bit less in the areas that you're already.
Covering.
It's the same thought pattern one would use if they were to look at partial movements.
If you were to look at a full full wrong again, using the overhead press as an example, and like you
said, OK, maybe you're sticking points in the lower part of that movement and then you decide
account getting to use a partial movement as well and just do the top half like it's it's the same
thought that will lead you there.
I'm laughing.
I'm laughing because last time I think we did the podcast, I talked about everything in exercise
science as a spectrum.
So you kind of have super stable exercises at one end and you've got like really unstable stuff at
the other end, and everything else is in the middle.
If you look at contractions, you can go from full range of motion at one end of the spectrum to
isometrics to the other, and your partials can get smaller and smaller and smaller and smaller and
smaller until it becomes isometric.
It's a really, really cool illustration of exactly the same point, you know?
Yeah, dynamics and partials is the same thing as dynamics to isometrics.
It's just that you've squeezed the duration or the amplitude of your repetition down to 0.
Yeah, it's very, very pinpointed, like you said.
Now people who are aware of isometrics will know that there's different definitions or different
types of isometrics that one might use.
And most commonly the two that are discussed most would be overcoming and yielding isometrics.
And there's a lot of confusion I see from people who are aware of isometrics as to which one would
you use, which one's best for hypertrophy.
So let's talk about what are those, what's overcoming and yielding and and is there a difference
from a hypertrophy perspective?
Yeah.
So essentially an overcoming isometric is one that you're trying to turn into a concentric,
essentially.
So a yielding isometric is one that you're going to end up turning into an eccentric if you're not
careful.
So I mean, that's basically the difference.
So you can kind of imagine that if you've got a Smith machine set up and it's locked in place and
you can't move the bar and you're set up and you just push on it, that's an overcoming by
definition, because if you take your hands off the bar, it doesn't move.
So a yielding would imply that it's trying to squash you as you're in the process of, you know,
holding it in place, whereas the overcoming is that you're actually trying to move it away from you
and it's not got any chance of, you know, kind of squashing you because it is actually fixed.
So the overcoming is going to have a very slight element of concentric to it and which actually
isn't that different from isometric.
So it kind of is a fairly neutral isometric.
The yielding is going to have a little bit of an element of eccentric about it.
And that's where things get a little bit interesting because you're going to get a little bit of
passive tension.
You're going to, if the, if it turns into a true yielding process where you're actually then turning
it into a nice an ecentric contraction, you're going to get a lot more of that as the contraction
progresses.
So essentially you're getting like a tiny little flavour of the concentric and the eccentric in your
isometrics as you're doing them.
In practice, I'm not a fan of yielding isometrics, especially when they turn into genuine
eccentrics, because I think you are, because what tends to happen is that you accumulate some
fatigue and you turn your eccentric, sorry, you turn your isometric into an eccentric.
So imagine you're just holding a weight and as you get to the point where you can't hold it anymore,
the weight starts to move towards you and then finishes At a certain point that is a kind of a quasi
isometric or sort of yielding isometric into an eccentric.
And the problem with that is that a lot of the good stuff that we get from eccentric contractions
with maximal efforts comes from an absence of fatigue.
And a lot of the problems that we get in post workout fatigue situations when we're doing eccentric
contractions comes from allowing fatigue to develop in those eccentric contractions.
So that's a hugely summarized view of the Physiology.
But broadly speaking, what that means is that you're not getting a lot of good stuff from allowing
from allowing isometrics to turn into eccentrics.
And you're not like getting a lot to and you are getting a lot more bad stuff from allowing that to
happen in terms of post work apathy.
So honestly, if you, if you're thinking about doing either of these two and you got the choice, I
would always go for an overcoming isometric or you know, that sort of side of the equation.
I don't see an enormous amount of value in the yielding side of things unless you really, really
know what you're doing and you've got a specific sporting situation that you're trying to mimic.
I really don't.
I wouldn't want to go there if I was.
And even then I would be asking myself the question, would it not be better just to do a maximal
effort?
Eccentric can be done with it.
Is that not going to get me the same place?
Now a tiny number of places that might not be true, but I think most of the time it would be true.
Yeah, that's interesting, isn't it?
Like I do look at for me when I look at yielding isometrics, I'm like, what are you, what are you
doing?
You're kind of doing an isometric into an eccentric like you said.
And if you wanted to do that, why would you not do both?
Why would you not do an overcoming isometric and then do and eccentric?
Like I don't really understand the idea of blurring the two together.
And like you said, you're kind of losing out and really you're kind of losing out on both in a sense
when you're combining them.
Yeah, I mean, it's, it's a similar situation.
It's like a lukewarm, you know, kind of.
It's neither hot nor cold.
It doesn't really do anything well.
And I, I levied the same criticism against upper lower splits a while back and I said upper lower
done with two of each type of workout.
So 4 workouts per week is not solving any problems.
It doesn't solve a problem that we have in any other training program and it so it's lukewarm.
It doesn't really do anything well.
And as a result, people started running around the Internet saying, Chris says that that upper
lower, you know, four times a week, as in two of each type of workout is the worst possible thing
you can do.
And I was like, no, I didn't say that.
Just said it's not a it's not a program that solves any particular problems.
I actually think it's better than bro split.
That's not the point.
And if the same thing happens here, it's like, so.
Oh, yeah.
No, Chris says that, you know, yielding isometrics are useless and you shouldn't do.
No, no, I didn't say that.
It doesn't do anything.
Well, it clearly will produce a whole bunch of adaptations, and, you know, it'll work.
It's just not doing an eccentric contraction well.
And as a result, I think it's not giving you anything extra that an overcoming isometric can't give
you in the context of what we're trying to do.
You know, I would always pick maximum eccentrics instead of overcoming isometrics, sorry.
I would always pick super maximal eccentrics over a yielding isometric if I was trying to get
eccentric related adaptations.
And I'd always pick an overcoming isometric over a yielding isometric if I was trying to get
hypertrophy or sort of joint angle specific strength gains.
So I don't see, and hopefully that helps clarify what I'm doing here.
I'm trying to point out that if you've got a toolbox of specific tools for specific purposes, I
don't see where yielding isometrics fit.
They don't do anything.
Well, as I say, there might be the 1% of a 1% scenario in a sporting situation where you can say,
oh, actually I do this and that works great.
But I don't think that applies for most people most of the time.
Yeah.
Now, just to make this incredibly clear for people, why are we saying that a yielding isometric is
likely going to lead to less hypertrophy benefit than an overcoming?
So you've mentioned overcoming what You're trying to push it.
You're trying to lift, not push.
You're trying to lift that load.
Yeah.
And yielding, you're trying to resist that load.
So what is changing from trying to resist the load and then potentially turning that into an
eccentric as opposed to trying to lift that load that's making it less suitable for hypertrophy?
Sure.
So essentially as soon as you start stretching an activated muscle fiber, you start getting calcium
I'm related fatigue and it's really pronounced.
So that's, I mean that's then inhibits your ability to produce mechanical tension on a single fiber
level.
One of the most like that sort of informative, if you like, illustrations of this point is that if
you look at the dose response of hypertrophy to training volume in normal strength training
situations, there's a nonlinear dose response, but it does show increasing amounts of growth with
increasing volumes.
If you look at eccentrics, it pretty much kind of caps out after three sets.
You kind of go one to three and then it's a flat line.
And that's really, really useful because what that's telling you is that the physiological
understanding that we have is correct, which is that as soon as you start accumulating a ton of
calcium, relative fatigue, mechanical tension starts dropping and you start to find that you can't
stimulate the hypertrophy that you try and situate.
So if you're doing multiple of these yielding isometrics and they're actually turning into a bit of
an eccentric, you are going to going to start stacking calcium iolated fatigue in the same way that
you would do is if you were doing a lot of stretch position.
In fact, more so than if you're doing a ton of stretch position isometrics.
So ultimately, again, if you want to volumize this stuff, you would, you wouldn't touch yielding
isometrics.
You would be absolutely on the overcoming side because you want overcoming and contracted position.
And then you're going to be able to volumize as much as you like within reason.
Whereas A yielding or a stretch position, you're going to have those calcium iolated fatigue
problems.
And if someone's listening to this thinking, well, hang on.
Why can I just do say I'm doing 15 seconds worth of overcoming so I do my 3 mini sets.
I do my 15 seconds worth of overcoming isometrics.
Why can I not finish with the yielding a single yielding isometric and get a stack of this passive
tension?
Is that not a viable way of doing it?
So with the durations that we're talking about, it is if you start going to longer durations, it
ceases to become quite so interesting.
So if you're doing 5 seconds and you're getting a yielding point at the end of that 5 seconds, then
yeah, absolutely that will work.
And you'll get some decent passive tension at the high threshold motuna and high end of the high
threshold motuna pool.
If you start, you know, kind of disregarding the suggestions that I've made and start trying to do
1520, you know, 32nd isometrics and you're getting, you know, kind of yielding at the end of that
2030 seconds.
No, it's not going to work.
It will, but it just won't work very well because what's going to happen is you're going to get a
lot of spinal CNFT.
It's going to reduce the access to high pressure mode unit that you're trying to train.
And you're going to find that you don't get that same sort of top end stimulus of the muscle fibers
and the tar corresponding to the high threshold mode units.
So obviously then also you've got that very large duration of contraction into the yielding.
You're going to find that you're getting, you've already got calcium and accumulation.
When you hit that point, you're then doing an eccentric in a calcium and accumulated state, which is
really silly.
You know, pre fatiguing.
Going into an eccentric is just not clever because ultimately you're already going into a scenario
where you're about to experience calcium allocative fatigue and you're going in there carrying bags
full of calcium ions with you.
I mean that is just asking for a post workout fatigue problem really.
So again, that scenario, you're getting the worst of both possible situations because you're
diminishing your stimulus dramatically with the spinal CNST and simultaneously you're racking up a
ton of post workout fatigue with your calcium accumulation.
So recruitment is is significantly lower in an eccentric than it is in a concentric.
Now how much does that CNS fatigue the one would accrue in say a 5 second more contracted position
isometric, how much is that going to have an effect on recruitment if that then turned into a
yielding or an eccentric?
So, yeah, exactly.
I mean, this is the kind of thing that we don't have very good data on.
So, you know, you could argue that maybe you, you know, obviously you're getting to a point where
you're very fatigued and you can't hold the isometric anymore.
You're definitively in the territory where you're going to be, you know, maximally resisting that
eccentric.
How much of that maximal resistance is going to be, you know, doable with a lower level of
recruitment really depends on what the ratio there is of the muscle fibre force in the eccentrics to
your isometrics.
Now, yeah, you're going to lose a little bit of recruitment off the top end anyway, so arguably it's
even worse than I was describing.
See you've, you've definitively said that you can't see a utility for a yielding isometric beyond
what you could get essentially by splitting up the eccentric and the isometric as an overcoming.
I think that's fairly, fairly clear there.
So then if we're talking about programming overcoming isometrics, is there anything else people need
to know about them before they start implementing them?
I think that we've kind of captured the important points here.
You know, the important points are exactly what we saw with the GRIMAC program.
You know, we're talking about a low volume of 5 second contractions with probably a minute between
contractions, ideally done at a number of joint angles.
Now just to be clear, if you want to work in the short muscle length end of the spectrum, the
contractor position, you can still change the joint angles a little bit.
You just don't have to change them as much, you know, so you can work with joint angles that are
relatively close together and you will get more coverage by doing that.
So being a relatively small number of maximal effort, 5 second contractions with one minute between
contractions and we're spreading them out across a bunch of joint angles.
And I think that's a really, really good recipe.
I mean, it never fails to amaze me just how dialled in these guys were.
You know, like you threw that together like in 5 minutes after I message you and say I'm getting all
these questions about isometric injections, let's do a podcast on isometric injections.
And 5 minutes later you've got, hey, I've got this amazing isometric routine that Grimac did.
And I'm like, that's just ridiculous.
You know, that we've got that, you've got that information and it turns out to be literally perfect
for the conversation that we're going to have.
So honestly, I think that I've got very, very little, if anything to disagree about with that
routine.
I personally would do less the stretched end of the spectrum, more the contracted.
I would probably even do them at the beginning of the workout rather than the end.
But other than that, I've got very little to say that is different to be honest.
I know this, you might not want to get into it.
It's a bit of a not a kind of words, but it's an adjacent topic.
But for people who did want to use isometrics from a strength perspective, is there anything to
comment on there?
So I often get asked this question in my consulting side of things and I do like this approach of
doing a couple of Max effort isometrics and relatively contracted positions in the warmups or
towards the end of a warm up.
I think it works really well for athletes or a number of different areas.
And the main reason that I like to do them is to produce an increase in Motuna recruitment.
So imagine you've got like a power lifter or another strength athlete.
They don't tend to do anything at high velocities.
Even when they do what they call speed work, it's not actually that fast.
You know, they're not used to moving quickly.
Now with a, with a speed athlete or a team sports athlete, I will be saying we're going to try and
increase MOTI net recruitment by doing our speed work, actual speed work, not what people think of
as speed work, but actual speed work, maximal efforts in unloaded situations.
We do those at the end of our warmups because that not only gives us speed related adaptations, it
also gives us an increase in motor unit improvement that we can then benefit from in our strength
related adaptations.
So with team sports and other speed athletes, I would always do my speed work as part of the end of
the warm up and then segue into strength stuff with power lifters and other strength athletes who
are not accustomed to that kind of rapid movement, you don't necessarily want to start throwing
speed work at them.
You'd be like, well, let's do isometrics instead.
And you get a really nice effect.
And the added benefit of isometrics is that you can do them with relatively low amounts of muscle
mass.
You can do them single joint, you can do them single limb.
You can really push the parameters that have the ability to increase mode to equipment as an
adaption.
Plus you can get joint angle specific about it because there's a joint angle specificity effect to
these neural adaptations.
So you can really kind of start analyzing your power lifter and go where am I seeing weakness and
sort of difficulty?
And you can be like, right, well, let's do some isometrics of specific muscles in those specific
positions.
Now the difficulty you're then going to have in practice is that a lot of those positions will be
stretched positions unless you're working with a geared power lifters, in which case it might be
different.
But generally speaking with power lifters are not using equipment, you'll find that most of this
difficulty is in the stretch position.
So Even so, if you're using just a couple of those contractions, you can get us some pretty
interesting results.
So I think that there's there's some really cool stuff there for power lifters to look at and other
strength athletes to look at because the overcoming isometric is it's so easy to do in a way that
doesn't create large amounts of fatigue such that you can incorporate it relatively early on in the
workout before you start getting you're too tired from everything else you do.
Yeah.
And you've mentioned doing it early on in the workout.
And obviously, as you just said there, part of the benefit of doing it is you're not causing this
fatigue that's going to affect the workout.
But if you're using it for the purpose of mudding, energy recruitment enhancement, then obviously
that's going to be more effective in an unfatigued state than doing it at the end.
The Grimmick doing it at the end, really we're looking at this more from a hypertrophy perspective.
If not they're doing it at the start, it's going to be negative hypertrophy, but you're not getting
these more strength specific benefits that you might be getting if you did at the start.
You did mention the.
Joint there's a really good argument.
There's a really good argument to moving it to the beginning.
I don't see.
I think on balance I would always err on the side of putting it.
Yeah, I always program it at the beginning as well.
I'm trying to think if there would be, if I could see a benefit to doing it at the end.
And I am struggling to see one and even just from a almost like a psychological standpoint, I
actually like almost using it as a warm up.
Like there's something, you know, doing these sort of Max effort sets.
It's a nice way to kind of begin the session.
I don't know it, it does seem a little bit, I don't know, I, I don't even recall even trying it at
the end of a workout.
So perhaps I will try that and see what it psychologically even feels like.
But yeah, it does make sense, certainly at the start of a workout.
You did mention this joint angle specificity.
So someone were using the isometrics partly for that purpose of increasing strength in a particular
lift.
Are there how close to that sticking point maybe that's a question, how close to that sticking point
or or where you're performing the isometric, where is there going to be this sort of overlapping
increase in in that joint specific angle?
Does that make sense?
I'm trying to communicate there.
Well, I mean, obviously it's best to try and identify the joint angle as well as you can because the
closer you get to it, the better the effect is going to be.
But you do get a spillover effect, you know, at least 10° either side.
So, you know, different studies show slightly different results, but you know, you're going to get a
spillover either side of that joint angle.
Honestly, I think it's worth putting the time into trying to identify precisely what the joint angle
is that you want to train.
Now, sticking point analysis is a science in itself and people can get really into it.
And I think it's worth reading up on the, the insurance and the outs of it.
The important thing to remember is that you, you're not looking for the point in the range of motion
where you get stuck, even though it sounds like that's what you're looking for, That's not, you're
not looking for the point where you stop.
You're looking for the point where you stop accelerating.
So you've got to go backwards a little bit from the point where you think the sticking point is,
because a lot of people will look at a squat and go, oh, my sticking point is here.
And I'm like, no, it's not.
It's actually like 10° before that, you know, because that's when you start decelerating.
Yep.
So if a car, if you're driving a car and you hit mud and then you start getting bogged in the mud,
the point where you stop, that's not the bit that mattered.
That's not the bit that mattered.
It's probably you hit the mud in the 1st place.
Yeah.
So you're looking at where you start decelerating.
So kind of go work backwards from where you thought the problem was and, and go and start doing the
work there because that's where the real problem is.
But you know, as I say, the the essence of sticking point analysis is, is it's complicated, but
ultimately that's the most important thing is to work backwards from where you think it is and try
and identify the joint angle further back when the problem actually started.
You mentioned this below, the effect 10 to 15° and and partly why I asked that question is when I
program these from a strength perspective and let's say it's with you know, clients who maybe I
don't know where the sticking point is, maybe it's more a general program template or whatever.
What I would do is program those isometrics usually about 1/4 of the way up and then halfway and
then 3/4 up and programming say, you know, in that fully stretched position only again this calcium
ion issue you talked about.
But if you're getting this spillover effect 1015° either side, well, you've just lost half of that
if you're doing it at the end.
And same if you're doing a fully contracted position, you've you've lost half of that as well.
So if I were to program it more generally, I would try to maximize that sort of spillover effect as
you mentioned.
Yeah, I mean, and that's really what Grimmick is doing.
You know, I think he's, he's trying to get the coverage across multiple different locations, not in
his case obviously from a hypertroid point of view with neural mechanical matching, but same thing
applies to neural adaptations as well.
So practically someone wants to use some of these.
We've given a few points there.
You talked about maybe using the start of the work and it makes a little bit more sense.
You've talked about how you can decide where you would perform them in that, in that joint specific
or in the particular repetition based on which muscle you want to target or based on strength
adaptations or whatever.
What else would be helpful for people to know in terms of using these?
So if someone, I guess one question there would be, and I'll let you speak to this what because I
know we've talked about this for years now.
Isometrics is something years ago we were talking about like me implementing them in my own
programming.
And you always had one very specific concern or, or something that a, a limitation you saw to them.
So do you want to tell us about that?
Yeah.
So basically the problem that everybody is going to run into eventually with isometrics is that you
don't know whether you getting better or not unless you've got some objective way of measuring that.
Now some people do have load cells that they've got access to.
I know a bunch of climbers that use load cells to see what their isometric strength are like.
You know, if you've got access to that technology, then fantastic, you can now use isometrics to
your heart's content and you're always going to know whether you're getting better or not because
you can literally read the number off the screen.
If you don't have that, you are going to be really struggling to know whether or not you're strength
is improving or not and therefore whether what you're doing is working.
Now in the context of the athletic situations that I described, I don't actually care that much
because I'm not doing it to produce a strength gain in the specific context that I'm doing it in.
I'm doing it to trigger an increase in MOTU recruitment.
I'm setting the parameters up in a way that I'm confident will generate that output and we just kind
of roll with it and hope for the best.
In the context where you're using it by hypertrophy, you want to be confident that it is working to
produce hypertrophy.
Therefore, you want to see some progressive overload and you're not going to see that now.
As you pointed out, we've been backwards and forwards on this many, many times trying to find an
elegant way of solving the problem.
I still don't have one.
So maybe you've got one by now, I don't know.
But honestly, I've got to the point where I'm like in the situations where somebody's going to find
themselves in, where they have to do isometrics because they've got no other choice, that's going to
be such a limited number of situations.
I actually find myself in one right now, but only for the next few weeks.
But ultimately, but again, you come out of that and you go into something else and then back you're
back on the kind of normal strength training program where you can see progressive overload
happening because you can measure reps changing.
So yeah, that's been my biggest problem with using isometrics in a hypertrophy context, because I
like to know whether a program is working.
I don't like to be unsure about it.
I like to see it happening.
And isometrics don't let you do that unless you've got a load cell.
And so obviously, if you were doing like in this example Grimmer gave, if you were still doing
curls, say on another day or you were doing a set of pearls in that work out anyway or whatever,
then you can obviously be tracking progressive overload on other exercises for that muscle.
But you don't know what's causing that.
Adaption, yeah.
You don't know whether it's not the dynamic training that you're doing anyway.
Exactly, exactly.
You know, I've, I've thought long and hard about ways to overcome this.
You know, one idea I had was selecting a say like a A5 repetition Max as an example, like A5 Rep Max
load for a specific.
So let's say you were performing the isometric in the the mid position of an overhead press and then
selecting a load that is a five year Max for that position.
I'm not saying your five year Max overhead pressing load, but say apart from that position and then
essentially doing almost what would be a yielding isometric, we just lift it the slightest bit like
a centimeter up.
So you know when you lift it and you know when you're no longer lifting it, right.
So it's not technically an overcoming isometric and that you're moving in a movable or you're trying
to move in a movable object.
But by doing that and then increasing that five Rep Max load over time or increasing that that load
over time and then testing it say every few weeks and seeing is this still A5 Rep Max load or is it
now a six Rep Max load.
That would be a way that one could have some assessment at some point in time, even if it's every
few weeks, to see if one were progressing or not.
Yeah, absolutely.
And I think really that's, that's kind of one of the only ways I can see it being feasible to, to
track progressive load, progressive overload in that situation.
Of course, one of the situations in which people find themselves in where they want to use
isometrics is when they don't have access to a gym.
So I would say the biggest use case of isometrics is when you're stuck in a hotel or in a, you know,
middle of nowhere and you've literally got yourself and a room and you're trying to find things to
pull on and push on to create isometric contractions.
And that's kind of all you've got.
Obviously you've got no way of doing those gym related testing checks to see where you're at.
And I think really that's, that's kind of my only problem with them.
It's a practical one.
But again, given that most people most of the time will only find themselves in those limited
scenarios for short periods of time, weeks or months.
I mean, obviously there are scenarios where you might have to go and work somewhere that has a very
limited gym access for a year or two, but less likely I think.
I think it's one of those things where you just say, well, I'm not going to worry about the
progressive overload thing.
I'm just going to do what I think looks right on paper paper.
And when I get back to the gym where I've got access to equipment, then I'll see where I'm at.
And I think that's probably what the answer is improved.
Yeah, we're not going to go into this in in detail, but I do just want to mention again for people
who are looking at implementing these, we are talking about Max effort isometrics.
We are not talking about pauses, because I see people use the language of isometrics for pauses.
A lot.
Well, it's the same as people using the language of eccentric contractions for the for the for the
eccentric phase of a of a normal strength training Rep.
It's like it's just a fundamental lack of understanding that there is a difference in effort between
these two things and that totally changes the effect of the exercise.
Absolutely.
Pauses can be isometric if you have the ability.
If if you're say for example, you're pausing at the end of a chest press and you can push into the
machine so that you're actually now doing an overcoming isometric that's but that's rare.
Most of the time, as you say, we're talking about pauses.
They're actually sub maximal situations and they're not going to do anything remotely similar to
what we're talking about.
But as you say, we'll cover that on another day, so we don't need to dig into it too much now.
Yeah.
Exactly.
Practically speaking, is there anything else you think would be helpful for people to know if they
were wanting to implement these?
No, I think said the same thing about 10 times already.
So.
And there's not a it's, it's not like you're limited to only doing it for multi joint exercises or
for single joint exercises or, you know, you don't have to use it.
Do barbell exercises like you can do it in a machine, like there's plenty of ways for one to get
creative and implement these on different apparatus with different exercises, different muscles.
And arguably depending on you know, what your goal is, it maybe makes more sense to get more
specific and granular with it rather than using it in a multi joint exercise.
It depends on your goal, doesn't it?
You know, obviously there's benefits to doing it in those particular exercises if we look at
isolating a region, which isn't normally getting trained well in that exercise for you, or if it's a
goal to increase the strength in that particular lift.
So what I guess what I do like about isometrics is the quite a versatile tool, like in some ways
more versatile than just a dynamic repetition would be or contraction because you can kind of
isolate out what you're particularly wanting to work on.
So it's just.
A yeah, absolutely.
That some of the one one thing I was just thinking while you were explaining that the same rules
apply As for dynamics when it comes to things like stability and muscle mass and all of that stuff.
So, you know, the same rules.
So if we're constructing an isometric exercise that we want to use, we don't want to be massively
unstable while we're doing it.
You know, you want to be very, very stable.
You don't want it to be moving you around.
Same thing with muscle mass.
You don't really want a ton of muscle mass if you're trying to produce the maximum level of Mote
unit equipment and stimulate the growth.
So, you know, that's just like we've talked about that before, but it, it still applies the same
kind of rules.
I yeah, I think you can construct some really interesting possibilities.
Some are easier than others.
Some some stuff is just really difficult to make work and other stuff is really easy.
But I think they're really good to play around with.
It to give people one example of how I'm using them in my own training just to get your creative
juices flowing.
So I often will have a particular lift that I might be focusing on in a particular phase.
And then, so for example, at the moment I'm doing a lot of behind the neck pressing and then what I
will do on either at the start of usually I'll do it at the start of if I'm doing like an AB split,
my ABI do full body AB.
But my ABS look very similar, like each program looks very similar.
There's only a few exercises that differ.
So technically it's an AB, but it's almost like an A1A2 in a sense.
But on one of those, I will normally add in at the start some isometrics and I will do it for that
1/3 or 1/4 position from the top, halfway from the top and then a third or quarter from the bottom.
And I'll do that on that sort of goal or that target lift of that phase for myself.
And then I may or may not follow that up with just one set of normal dynamic contractions for that
exercise.
And then I've got the other day where I'm just doing it as a standard set where I can and I'm seeing
or tracking my progressive overload in that.
And then each Phase, I might pick one, I might change it and ick a different exercise to do it with.
And I'm tending to use it more on those exercises like the overhead press where I know that there's
regional differences in that particular exercise.
So for me, whatever muscle's not getting trained well in that normal set, I can actually isolate
out.
Yeah, no, that makes sense.
I mean, that's very similar to how I would approach it for powerlifting training, to be honest.
Well, thank you, Chris for hopefully clearing up what is a a topic online, which I think is covered
in so much confusion.
So hopefully that's demystified to take taking away some of the fog and giving some people some
ideas or or some framework or foundation to actually implement it in their own training.
And like we've said, you know, it's a very versatile tool where we'd love to hear you guys using
this.
And we don't think everyone needs to be doing it for every single program.
You know, it's not like it's a Holy Grail of hypertrophy, but it is versatile and it is something
that has benefits and specific utility in in whatever, you know, specific cases.
So we'd love to hear you guys use it.
Thank you, as always, for joining us, and we hope you'll join us for another episode.