Episode: 017 Exercise Selection - How to pick the exercises needed to maximally develop a muscle
URL: https://open.spotify.com/episode/14LhLs0uMkxLlnqGEeLZ73
Published: 2025-09-15
================================================================================

Welcome back, everyone, to another episode.
Good morning, good evening, wherever you are.
Chris, how are you tonight?
Yes, it is tonight for me.
I'm doing very well.
Thank you, Jake.
Awesome.
Good to hear we are back at it again.
Another fun episode.
This is I'm not going to give away what we're going to talk about.
You'll probably work out what we're going to talk about when I jump into this plan we're going to
talk about today.
So we have, we are going back to C Client.
So we've talked about C Client only a couple of weeks ago.
So if you haven't listened to that episode, I would encourage you to do something.
I really I'd encourage you to listen to all of our episodes.
And what I should mention as well is a lot of our episodes to actually build on former episodes, if
you're kind of intimately jumping in and out, we obviously appreciate you guys, but you might find
it valuable to go back and listen to the old episodes, not necessarily in order, but it is going to
be helpful to fill in some of the gaps anyway.
So see Klein, in case you forget who he was, he kind of sat in this interesting period where he was
sort of like kind of half bronze, half silver era.
So obviously well and truly before Anabolics, but kind of also before a lot of the competitions like
the Miss Universe began.
So he's not he's not as well renowned, I guess for that reason, like he didn't compete in in some of
those competitions.
But if you do go back to that sort of, you know, 1930s kind of era, you do obviously see see client
pop up a lot.
He was very influential writer, coach, and I think he's a gym owner as well.
So he had a lot of athletes and clients that he was working with.
Now.
He was also kind of one of those strongman types as well.
So again, you know, if you look at the drones here, we've got like a lot more strength feats as
opposed to more of these the typical bodybuilding shows that we know today.
So we did talk about a beginner plan from Sig a few weeks ago.
And now what we're talking about is not necessarily beginner plan.
It's a plan that he work out that he actually did himself.
Now I'm just going to jump into it.
It looks a little bit interesting on paper, but let's let's hop in.
So buckle up, there's a bit here.
First up, Oh well, let's make it simple.
So every single exercise we're doing a single set.
So I'm not going to say that again.
So just one set, 10 to 20 repetitions on average.
Some of the exercises, some of the lower body exercises we've talked about this before less
accessibility to equipment, what stand stuff like that.
He did suggest going up to the 20 reps some of the the lower the upper body stuff was a little bit
lower in repetition.
The reps were not really, as you know, as we've talked about before, there was often a little bit of
leeway in, in kind of what repetition someone would use.
But generally speaking, we're talking about 10 to 20.
So we begin with A2 arm curl, so a bicycle, then we go to a lateral raise and then we go to side
bends.
Now we've talked about this before.
Side bends did kind of they, they were common up until maybe the 50s, fifties and then we see them
drop out, but they were very common at this point.
We then go to alternating dumbbell front raise, back to side bends and then to a military press, a
barbell overhead press.
Then we go to the deep knee bend, which is our squats.
We've basically just had upper body exercises so far.
Then we've got a squat and we go back to the alternating front raise and then we have a triceps.
It was called triceps push away.
I believe there's kind of like a triceps press down type exercise and it was bending forward to the
waist and then we have chin up, which I know you'll be very happy to see.
And then we have a wrist exercise.
So there was like a roller type contraption that we're using.
And then we go into a leg curl.
I think that would have been using iron boots at this point.
So that would have been strapping on weighted shoes basically to the leg curl.
And we go to some calisthenics.
So he had a press up to a handstand on a bench.
And then we've got this crisscross exercise we've discussed in the past where I think it's sort of
like a lateral raise maybe in around the world style type exercise.
And he did this standing and then he did one lying as well.
So more of a fly slash, I guess like a lying around the world type exercise.
And then into alternate dumbbell pullovers, leg Grays, bar dips, dumbbell curls with the palms
facing in width.
So like a, a hammer curl, a leg Crest.
He would have been using a barbell on his feet at this point.
And then they did, yeah, which is very funny when you see the the diagrams of that.
And then we have a neck exercise and then we have a squat and a Roman chair, which is basically a
Sissy squat.
And then what we call tiger bands, which is another calisthenic exercise.
It was kind of like a almost like a, a, a handstand push up, but going down to your forearms.
So I don't know if you kept up with me there.
There's a lot of exercises, something like 18 and 19 different exercises, and then some of those
repeated a couple of times as well.
Obviously single sets, but if you've got to repeat, then we had two sets of some of those exercises.
That's a long session.
What do you make of that, Chris?
Yeah, there's a lot here.
I mean a couple of observations straight away.
There's a lot of shoulder work.
So this is kind of taking me back to the sundial that we looked at the very beginning.
So we've got a couple of sets of front raisers, we've got some lateral raisers in there, we've got
an overhead press, the military press, and then we've got these crisscross exercises which are
probably quite similar to that.
So there's a lot of different shoulder exercises in there, which I think is very interesting
straightaway just from a like, you know, aesthetic choice point of view, but also from an exercise
variation point of view.
There's also a little bit of exercise variation in terms of a couple of other muscle groups.
So particularly interest actually in quads, because a lot of the time we tend to view the quads as
very homogeneous.
And now we know the rec fem obviously isn't quite so homogeneous.
We've got the upper and lower regions, approximal and distal regions, which you're going to see with
a hip flexion and knee extension without, you know, but thinking about squat and leg press type
things for a moment.
And so it's cool that we've got a leg raise in here, which is hip flexion, because the rect FEM is
the primary hip flexor in the first part of that range of motion.
We've also got the Roman chair squat, which as you described to me before we jumped on this podcast
to do this, is kind of like a Sissy squat.
So it's kind of like a rect FEM sort of focused exercise there.
So it's interesting that we've got some exercise variety for quadriceps really now we've got a squat
and we've also got a leg press.
I'm not sure that's really going to be any different from a quadriceps point of view, but it
probably is going to be different from a hip extensor point of view because obviously the squat
comes all the way up to a hip extension, full hip extension, whereas the leg press works in a
totally different range of motion.
It's very, very much more flexed hip for the entirety of the situation in which you find yourself.
So there's some variety that it's probably not quadriceps related variety, just mentioning it
because it it does occur with the quadriceps exercises.
The thing that jumped out to me, as you pointed out is that we do have chin UPS in this program.
Now being chin UPS, it probably is sort of sagittal or maybe a little bit wider than that, maybe
more scapular.
But certainly it won't be frontal because it's really hard to do frontal plane pulling with a, an
underhand grip.
It just doesn't really work that well.
So I'm guessing that is probably sagittal.
So OK, fine.
There's nothing else though.
There's nothing else for back, but unless you argue that the pullovers are doing something for back
and they didn't see that as a back exercise, they saw it as a as a lower back exercise.
Exactly.
And we would say the same thing now most of the time we find that a lot of the things that they said
are lining up with what we would say now from bio mechanics and Physiology knowledge.
But it's interesting that yes, the choice of back exercise is different from what we've seen in many
other of these programs, but the lack of back exercises is not.
I mean, that is a sort of a really distinctive feature of so many of these programs we look at is
that the back exercises are on the weaker side.
In terms of variety, either pull up variation or been overgrown.
And I think really that's the thing that I keep going back to, which clashes with with what I would
understand from a training sort of point of view and what I'm seeing here.
Most of the time, my sort of expectations for what a good training program would look like are
lining up pretty well with what I see in these routines.
But every single time I look at the back section of the workout planet just doesn't work properly.
And I think that's really interesting that we do have the the chin up here, but we don't have
anything else, don't even have a deadlift variation, do we?
I mean, there's just nothing here at all.
And again, that's a strange thing to be seeing because you know, given that we're working with, you
know, you've got this leg press, ridiculous leg press situation where you're kind of balancing a
barbell on your feet, you know, danger of death, danger of death is extremely high, you know, but
you you can't bring yourself to pick up a bar off the floor and do a deadlift.
I mean, come on, was what's that all about?
So so many times I have questions that can't be answered, but that's kind of my first pass at my
thoughts of looking at this routine the.
Triceps exercise.
I want to mention that I I made a mistake when I said it was like a cable push down type generation.
I remember now that Sig actually did this with a barbell behind his back.
And so if you can imagine, imagine holding a barbell behind your back and then you, you pivot your
like forwards to the waist and you extend your arms behind your back as far as you can.
So it's almost, it's almost like a kickback type exercise, but you're using a barbell and so you're
not getting the, the bend in the elbows when you're doing so.
Does that make sense?
You can you visualize them?
I've talked to you about this a couple of years ago.
I don't know if you remember and this was an idea.
I.
Do remember.
Because you're potentially getting some long head in this exercise, aren't you?
So.
So what we're saying is that this is a shoulder extension exercise, yes, past the point to shoulder
neutral position.
So we've gone past the anatomical position, we're now behind the back and we're pushing into
shoulder extension there.
So that would be obviously sagittal plane.
So now from a lap point of view, it would be probably pretty similar to the chin UPS not really
doing anything different.
But yeah, maybe there's but I don't know.
I mean, this is the issue that we face with from a triceps point of view.
This is the issue that we face with when we're talking about things like dips and and so forth.
You know, what does shoulder position past the anatomical position do to the triceps brachy long
head?
Just don't know.
I don't know of any data that exists that would would allow us.
I mean some people have speculated that the long head may become a shoulder flexor at that point.
You know, I mean, I'm not saying that's right or that's wrong.
I don't think there is any data at all that would tell us what that is muscle is doing at that
point.
But yes, so potentially that might not even be a triceps exercise, It could be make a pretty
different.
Interesting.
He's got dips in here as well.
We haven't seen dips utilized that often.
I think maybe maybe one or two of the plans so far, but not a whole lot.
And he's obviously got the calisthenics work in there as well.
So from an exercise selection standpoint, this is somewhat different to a lot of the plans we've
talked about so far.
It is.
I think there's, yeah, as you say, maybe 18 or 19 exercises and a couple of repetitions, Repetitions
mostly on the shoulder stuff again, yeah, interesting kind of aesthetic choice there.
So we're definitely seeing a throwback to that, you know, kind of maybe bronze era of focusing on
that shoulder development, not so much on PEC development.
But again, you know, as we always kind of say when we look at these routines, sometimes maybe there
were personal reasons for choices.
People have felt that they were very well developed in some areas and not so well developed in other
areas.
So maybe they put routines together that favoured them personally, you know, So sometimes I think
you can't always say, well, this is what they were doing for aesthetic reasons, or this is what they
were doing because they thought it was best.
Sometimes it's like, well, maybe they were just doing that because that's what they needed to do.
And maybe he felt at this time that shoulder development is what he needed.
But the variety is really what is fascinating because there's a lot of variety going on here in
that, in that respect.
Yeah, And I will just quickly mention this workout was actually documented relatively late, we're
talking early 50s, even though these exercises are very much bronze era type exercises.
So I suspect we're also seeing this summer Sig's, you know, personal bias or preference there in
terms of what he maybe, you know, desires and physique in terms of the exercise selection, no.
Absolutely no, that makes sense.
So 18 and 19 exercises, a couple of double UPS.
I mean, this is interesting as well because at this point the set system did exist and he was
choosing not to do the set system.
He's choosing not to do, you know, multiple sets in a row who's actually choosing to repeat a couple
of exercises, which I think is interesting in and of itself, but maybe a topic for another day.
So it's a lot of different exercises and we're going to talk a little bit about the necessity to
perform many different exercises or not.
So do you want to introduce us to this idea?
Yeah.
So essentially this is a continuation of the neuro mechanical matching discussions that we've had
previously on this podcast.
So if neuro mechanical matching is a new idea to you, then I would strongly recommend that you
scroll back on our list of podcasts and find the one in which we've gone through the entirety of the
idea in totality and discussed the various criticisms and what we know about it.
Why we think it makes the most sense as a way of talking about or way of describing how the central
nervous system decides where to send it's neuro Dr. during a movement.
Now what we're going to talk about today is a much more practical kind of aspect of that, which is
where do you draw the line in terms of biasing specific regions.
Now when I say bias, you have to think about that in the context of what new mechanical matching is
actually doing.
So let me give a very quick outline of what's happening.
So essentially what neural mechanical matching says is that the central nervous system will always
prefer to use muscles or regions of muscles.
And you can, you can kind of do a Russian doll thing and go down to the smallest level if you want.
So you know, muscles and then regions and then sub regions and anything you want to do there.
And we'll talk more about that later on.
Essentially, it always prefers to use the muscle fibers of specific motor units which have the best
leverage and it'll try and use those first and then move on to muscle regions or specifically the
muscle fibers associated with motor units that have worse leverage later on.
Now essentially an example of that would be if you're doing a sagittal plane pulling motion, whether
it's a pull down or a row, you'll find that if you look at the leverages, the posterior deltoid has
by far and away the best leverage of any muscle in that kind of that can work in that scenario.
And so generally speaking, what will happen is that the posterior deltoid will receive a lot of the
motor units in that posterior deltoid will receive muscle activation preferentially to muscle fibers
or motor units in the in the lats.
Of course, the posterior deltoid doesn't have a lot of motor units in it.
So what you're going to find is that the the brain will start sending central motor command to the
posterior deltoid.
And as you start increasing your effort level and producing more and more central motor command,
you'll run out of places to send that central motor command in the posterior deltoid and you'll end
up sending it to the thoracic region of the lat.
Now eventually you'll end up kind of capping out because there's a the maximum amount of central
motor and you can actually generate according to the Marcoras model of the psychobiological model of
details is that we reach our maximum perception of effort.
We can't produce any more central and you're going to cap out.
So essentially what this is showing us is that the posterior deltoid probably doesn't receive the
majority of the central motor command.
I mean this is an interesting point actually to This is why bio mechanists can get really confused
and they go but I don't understand principle of new mechanical matching because the latter is the
prime mover or the thoracic latter is the prime mover and the size to plane pulling motion.
So how are you saying that the posterior delta gets preferential treatment?
Well, because the posterior delta comes first, so the brain sends it first.
Then when you get to the top of the activation of posterior delta, you move on to the thoracic lat.
And yes the thoracic lat has more total mote units.
So if you look at the total amount of centrimeter Gran that has gone to the thoracic lat and the
posterior delta at maximum effort more centromotic and has gone to the thoracic, but it didn't get
sent that activation first.
So it wasn't preferentially activated.
There's an interesting distinction there to be made, and that's why biomechanists are getting
really, really confused about what neuron kind of combating is telling us.
And if you ever did this on, I used to do camps, you know, school camps and stuff like that as a
child.
And one of the camp tricks or little games that people would do is they would stack glasses and
you'd have, you know, four or five glasses stacked together.
And then you would pour water in the top and the first one would fill up and then it would overflow
into the next 1.
You would make a fountain basically.
And essentially, it's not perfect, but that's kind of what we're getting at is there might be a
smaller glass at top, it fills up and then it overflows.
And so there might be a larger glass beneath which is getting more water or.
Eventually, once you've once you've finished emptying the jug of whatever you're pouring onto those
glasses, yes, you'll find that the larger glasses do carry more water, but they weren't filled 1st
and that's exactly what's happening.
You're right, that's exactly what's happening in this example.
But I mentioned that as an aside.
The, The, the thing I'm I'm pointing out here is that the way that neuro mechanical matching works
is to preferentially send activation to those muscle regions or specifically motor units that have
the best leverage.
And then obviously move on to ones that don't have quite so good leverage that still do
fundamentally the same joint action, just not as efficiently because efficiency is produced by
having a large moment on because you get a larger joint torque for the same amount of muscle force
that you are producing with the motor units that you're activating.
Is that all OK so far?
Yes, Awesome.
So essentially then what we need to do is to say, well, okay, how do we know what number of
exercises might be appropriate for a muscle group?
Because we've talked just now about how maybe the thoracic lat is, you know, the main region of the
lat that gets used in the sagittal plane motion.
And I've mentioned before that the the lumbar and pelvic regions of the lat tend tend to be the
best, have the best leverage for frontal plane motions for the LAT.
One of the reasons why I always look at the programmers of these silver and bronze era bodybuilders
and I kind of I'm very critical of the back kind of side of things, the back training side of
things.
You can do the same thing for the delts.
I mean, you know, bodybuilders are very, you know, well aware that you need multiple exercises for
the delts, that there's very specific regions and the same thing applies to the Pecs.
You've got, you know, kind of upper clavicular, middle sternal and lower coastal regions of the
pecs.
It's all kind of like these various different regions.
So you know, at what point do we stop?
I mean, I think if you kind of just come back to this Russian doll idea, you know, one of the
interesting couple of interesting studies that have been done over the last couple of decades has
shown that our classical representations of anatomy where we say look, you know the LAT has these
three major regions, when look the delts have these three major regions and the Pecs have these
three major regions.
And then maybe somebody will come along and go, well, hang on a minute.
You know, if you do this much more careful analysis of the cadavers or the electromyography or
whatever they may be using to inform them about what's going on, you can say, well, actually there's
seven regions here.
There's not three.
You can subdivide some of these regions.
And going back to this Russian doll idea, you can probably subdivide the subdivisions, you know,
because ultimately where, you know, mechanical matching works is on a motor unit basis.
So you can go right the way down to motor unit and all the muscle fibers of that motor unit reactor.
You can't go any lower than that because muscle fibers don't get activated separately.
If they're part of a motor unit, you know, they all go, you activate.
It's kind of like once you get down to motor unit level, that's as far as it will go.
So you can go no subdivide your subdivisions.
So I think there's a really interesting conversation here and this is the topic of today's kind of
the topic of the Physiology part.
Today's podcast is to say, well, how far can we go?
And what I want to do is just share some ideas that will help us refine, you know, where that limit
might arise.
But ultimately where I want to start is to say that we're going to end up describing A sliding scale
whereby you can move in a direction and you'll get essentially diminishing returns the further you
kind of go with this.
It's like you can get quite a long way with a little bit of exercise variation, but you can get
further with a bit more exercise variation.
But you can find as we talked this through is that the the the benefits of extreme exercise
variation are going to get much, much smaller and potentially become only interesting to the most
advanced people, which is essentially A trend that we have seen in the past whereby as you've
pointed out, you kind of become more advanced to add exercises and then you end up with this great
to exercise variety with more advanced training.
Before you jump into it any further, I've do have a question.
So you've mentioned regions, sub regions.
Is, is there like an actual definition for what would Class A region versus a sub region?
Or is it are we just kind of working on this sliding scale like you're saying?
So before I answer that question, which I'm probably not going to answer very well, but before I
answer, I just want to mention that when we're dealing with terminology, we have to be extremely
careful that our terminology is rooted in physiological reality.
So one of my criticisms that I often raise and I repeat this when I do my mentorship, is that the
central nervous system doesn't know that we've given all these different names to all the muscles of
the body.
It doesn't know that.
It doesn't know that we've said, oh, look, this is the hamstrings muscle group.
We're going to call this the semi tendernosis.
And this is a completely separate muscle called the semi membranosis.
Doesn't know that we've done that from an anatomical from dissection studies in the past looking at
all the different muscles and anatomically studying them.
But the central nervous system doesn't know that.
All it knows really is that these mote units have these leverages.
So ultimately the central nervous system thinks in terms of mote units and then what we do is we map
the anatomy on top of that.
And we say, well, in this exercise what we're mostly seeing is motor units in the semi tendinosis
working OK, but the CNS doesn't see it that way.
It just sees leverages.
So ultimately anatomic anatomical descriptions are only ever going to be like a map placed onto a
terrain.
The map is not the terrain.
You know, it's close to it, but it's not the same thing.
So you kind of got a mapping effect where you're saying this is what we are describing as being
these these muscles and these muscle regions.
But the fundamental reality is that the Physiology, the brain, the CNS and all the various parts of
that only respect the existence of motor units with specific leverages.
And what we're doing is we're just placing a template on top of that and saying this is what broadly
seems to work.
When these exercises are done, we see those regions, but that's not what the CNS is thinking.
Does that make sense?
Yeah, I think that's a good.
That's really helpful, I think, for this conversation.
So we've always got to be very careful about when we, because one of the rather unpleasant
consequences of naming something is that you think you kind of now understand it, you know, And I
think that's a very, very, very difficult kind of, well, it's a very, very easy trap to fall into.
And it's a very difficult trap to extricate yourself from when you've fallen into.
It is like, because I've named it, I now understand what it does.
It's like, ultimately this is the base of all the problems that bodybuilders have when they go this
exercise trains the hamstrings.
What they've just done there is they've named something the hamstrings, and they've described an
exercise having an effect on that thing that they've named, and they've gone.
This does that.
Well, physiological reality isn't that isn't what's happening.
You know, there's a messiness, There's a kind of, yes, there's a bunch of motor units that are being
recruited, but they're not going to map perfectly on to what you've named.
There'd be other stuff going on.
And not every motor unit in all of the hamstring muscles is going to act.
It's going to be recruited in response to the exercise that you've done.
When we say, oh, this exercise works that muscle, straight away you've fallen into a trap because
that's not what's happening.
Now, I know we use that shorthand and we say that and we're like, Oh, yeah, this exercise does this
and this exercise does that.
Not really.
That's not really what's going on because there isn't a mechanism by which that can happen.
Oh, no, you know, the brain is switching that muscle on.
That's just not what happens.
The brain controls motor units.
That's how it works.
And if those motions happen to be scattered across this part of the muscle and summon another
muscle, then fine, That's what's going on.
But there isn't a scenario where, you know, you do this exercise, Oh, well, I'm working the triceps.
So many times you open up, you know, Instagram or Tiktok or whatever and somebody is talking to
camera going, oh, this exercise works right.
Well, this exercise works the entire lat.
I mean, like, that's just not physiologically what's happening, you know, but this is the trout that
people fall into when they don't start with what physiologically is going on.
They don't look at neurocanical machine.
They understand what is actually being being done.
So ultimately, you know, when you want to answer the questions like, you know, what definitions do
we have, which was what you asked me.
You asked me what is the definition of a, of a muscle in a subregion?
Because ultimately that's just not something that CNS understands.
You can get anatomical definitions of these things and you can say, well, you know, what is the
anatomical definition of the anterior glute medius?
Well, yeah, you can get someone to draw a line on a on anatomical sort of picture for you and show
you what the borders of that muscle region are.
But it doesn't tell you anything from an excise selection point of view because ultimately it's
about moting, it's not about regions and.
Potentially if we were to try to come up with boundaries of what class is a sub region or not, we
would probably be looking at that from a leverage standpoint in terms of what does dysfunction and
then that would actually change potentially from person to person as well.
It will do absolutely.
Broadly speaking, obviously if you think about it, if you have a few backing up one step motor units
are usually what we call quasi randomly distributed inside muscles.
So what that means is that you'll get a bunch of motor units and the muscle fibers that they are,
you know, kind of sort of hesitate to use the word governing, but the mussifiers are the part of
that motor unit.
So if you've got a motor neuron that's innovating a bunch of muscle fibers, those muscle Fiers will
tend to cluster in one particular area within the muscle.
There's there's a tendency for people to think that, you know, if you have a motor unit, muscle
fibers are all over the place.
This is not how it works.
So you get like a specific area inside a muscle and you'll find that all the muscle fibers
associated with that motor unit are all going to switch on in that particular area, not like in a
single fascicle.
So they're not grouped in that logical way that we might think, but they are going to be quasi
randomly sort of located in a articular area.
Essentially what that then means is that your motor unit has a specific leverage effect.
Because if you think about a muscle fibre in a particular part of a muscle and then you look at the
most fibres nearby it, by definition they're all going to have similar leverages because they're all
in the same place, you know.
So you get your motor units, they're all, and therefore if you have a bunch of motor units which are
all kind of in the same sort of area of a muscle, they're all going to have a similar leverage.
So when we talk about regions, what we're saying in a very kind of fuzzy way is that these motor
units that are operating in this area, because they will have muscle fibers that are very sort of
close by each other.
They will have similar leverages.
And so we can kind of just draw a rough circle around it and say these motor units kind of have a
regional kind of characteristic to them.
And you can say, well, this bit and you can point at it and you know, this bit here of the lat, you
know, I mean, some really nice electromyography studies that show that might even be lateral medial
variations in, in lat kind of function.
And you can just kind of draw a circle around and go, well, this bit of the lap maybe does a bit
more of this.
And this bit of that maybe does more of this because the brain will preferentially activate it.
So more of it will end up getting switched on.
I'll explain how that works in a minute.
But ultimately what we're saying then is that you can't really kind of just say, oh, look, this
precise area here, like a stake, you might sort of identify as sort of a, if you're, you know, kind
of thinking like that, But you know, you kind of got this section of us and you can say like, well,
this does this.
Well, no, that's not the way the body works.
It doesn't work in terms of, you know, anatomical chunks of meat doing different things.
It works in terms of motor units, which are loosely mapped across regions.
But you do get enough of a kind of connection to be able to say, well, yeah, the anterior, you know,
glute medius tends to do most, you know, it, it tends to be highly activated.
Lots of motions get recruited when you're doing internal, you know, hip rotation, whereas the
posterior tends to get more into his next turnip rotation.
And so you can kind of go down that route of loosely mapping a few things on top of each other.
But just remembering that when we are naming stuff anatomically that actually doesn't connect
logically with what's happening physiologically.
We are literally just mapping in the same way that you might say, try to think of an example.
You might say, say, I don't know, maybe you've got a couple of businesses in a particular area of
town and there's a small kind of square with a bunch of coffee shops and all these businesses at
lunchtime, all the people employees come out and they go into the coffee shops and they they and
drink their lunch and and then they go back to their work.
Now, you could say that because of just the sheer volume of customers that you're seeing from those
businesses that if you were to go in the coffee shop and you were to ask everybody who works at
these three businesses, if you put their hands in the air, you know, you'd probably find the
majority of the people in that coffee shop were from one of those two businesses.
But you'd also get people from other places as well because their coffee shop is public some place
and you've got people.
Do you see what I'm saying?
So it's like you can't map directly these things on top of each other because they aren't actually
connected.
So there isn't a scenario where you can go, oh, look, in this exercise, the entirety of this, you
know, kind of thoracic reason of that is being used.
No, it's just not how it works.
Yes, we talk about that from a short hand point of view.
No, that's not how it works.
So you end up with a Russian doll effect where you can go all the way down to motor units, but
that's the lowest you can go.
That's the smallest Russian doll that you can reach.
Everything above that is very, very fuzzy because as you pointed out, there'd be individual
differences.
But yeah, the fuzziness doesn't detract from the truth of the matter, which is, yeah, you will find
that most of that area, the motor units in that area tend to have the best leverage.
That's just the way it works in terms of, you know, finding the mussifiers with best leverage is
going to be they're going to be located in that particular area.
So naming stuff and saying this is a region and it automatically means that that region is fully
activated.
No, that's not what you can do, but you can loosely say yes, most of the motor units have
preferential recruitment status because they have established will be found in this area.
And same way that you know if you go into the coffee shop, most of the people that are going to work
for those two big businesses.
Yeah, great.
And obviously that also means that they'll be mode units that are conventionally, we would say part
of a different muscle or muscle region or whatever that might also be.
Absolutely, you could just find that something weird gets recruited.
Won't be very particularly won't be very big.
I wouldn't have thought it would just be, you know, here or there.
So again, we're mapping the way that the CNS works onto our understanding of human anatomy, and
they're not going to line up perfectly.
I can't, you cannot say this region, that region, the other region with absolute certainty.
There's always going to be that fuzziness.
Doesn't mean we can't try and doesn't mean we can't be, you know, as accurate as we possibly can
about saying, well, yeah, mostly this region, mostly that region.
There's always going to be that uncertainty.
So what do we do with that talk?
Talk us over this sliding scale.
So basically where we get to then is to say, well, what do we know about the way in which mode units
are recruited in different exercises?
And how does that then translate to understanding what occurs in this kind of this Russian doll kind
of situation that we're talking about with neuro Kaku matching.
What we're going to look at is this idea of voluntary activation deficits and how voluntary
activation deficits will change according to the exercise that you're doing.
So essentially, imagine that.
Well, let's talk.
Let's talk through it from from 2 perspectives, 1 from a muscle perspective and one from an exercise
perspective.
So you look at it from a muscle perspective.
If you go through the list of muscles and their voluntary activation deficits, now a voluntary
activation deficit means that you can't voluntarily, hence voluntary to be all the motor units in
that muscle in a maximal effort.
So if you look at standard knee extension test, the voluntary activation deficit for a knee
extension test is generally around about 10 to 15%, pushing 20% in some situations.
So a big chunk of the motor units just not being switched on despite the fact that people are giving
it everything they possibly can in that situation.
How do we know that?
Because we have something called the interpolated twitch, which is where you superimpose an
electrical of stimulus on top of the muscle while you're doing the maximal effort.
And that gives you an index of how much more muscle fiber area you could actually activate and
contribute to the contraction.
It doesn't tell you if you are not activating muscle fibers that don't have leverage though.
So this is something really important.
So let me just go down another quick rabbit hole.
I know that this is turning into a massive kind of rabbit hole ridden well this.
Hole here is if people understand what you're about to say and what you've just said, it'll actually
have a really important implication for how you choose exercise selection and write our program.
So I think you should pay.
The the voluntary activation test that we use is called the interpolated twitch method.
Now, basically, as I say, involves doing a maximal isometric contraction.
So you're giving every bit of effort you possibly can for three to five seconds.
And that should basically recruit all motor units.
I mean, in a perfect world, you would recruit all your motor units that have leverage to do that
particular exercise.
Now, some people think that it also recruits motor units that don't have leverage.
Now just kind of, we'll work through that in a moment, But basically the electrical stimulus that's
placed on top of that maximal effort then tells you whether you've got mossifiers that have leverage
that are not being used.
And in quadriceps situations in the extension, you get about, as I say, maybe 1015% a bit, a little
bit more.
Now as you start, if you look at smaller and smaller muscles, you'll find that voluntary activation
deficit gets smaller and smaller and smaller.
And it gradually grades down from the glutes and the quads all the way down to maybe the elbow
flexors where you start to see maybe 2-3 percent deficit.
So really, really tiny.
If you go past that and you start looking at like wrist muscles and finger muscles, you don't
generally see any voluntary activation deficits at all.
So what that's telling you is that the reason that we are getting a voluntary activation deficit is
because the amount of central motor command is bigger when you have more motor units and because
that's what you generally find is the bigger muscle have more motor units.
So you've got bigger muscles and more motor units.
You need more central motor command to get to the top end of that sort of sequence of motor units
and you don't get there, you actually stop before you get to the top.
Now Henemann's size principle obviously is applying.
So you're going to start with the easiest to sort of recruit motions with the fewest number of
fibers and where you were at the top, but you know, essentially had them in size.
Principles can work inside of the principle new mechanical matching.
You're always going to start with the chunks of muscle that have best leverage and you know, kind of
work up from that.
Now when you get to the top of your sequence, let's see you're doing an extension and you're sort of
voluntary activation.
Net deficit measurement is telling you that you've got say, 10 to 15% of the of the fibers that have
good leverage are not being used.
That's not telling you about the fibers that don't have leverage because they can't produce force
and they can't produce force in the voluntary conjection.
Sorry, torque.
They can't produce torque in the voluntary conjection because even if they had the ability to be
activated, the muscle force wouldn't produce torque because you don't have any leverage.
And similarly, in the involuntary contraction, if you electrically stimulated some muscle fibers
that didn't have any leverage, they just wouldn't add any torque, so you wouldn't measure that
either.
So they don't hit either side of the equation.
So you're literally invisible to you.
So it's entirely possible that when we talk about voluntary activation deficits, which is not
entirely possible, it's absolutely guaranteed.
It's absolutely guaranteed that not only are we missing the activation of muscle fibers that have
leverage because that's what a voluntary activation deficit measurement tells you is happening,
you're also missing stuff that's not being activated and doesn't have leverage.
So when we say that, you know, say 15% of the muscle is not being activated in a, in a, in the
maximum voluntary activity, that's massively underestimating what's actually happening.
Because if you don't have leverage, then muscle fibers won't be activated in any way.
They won't even contribute torque.
So there's other stuff that's not being used.
And therefore voluntary activation deficits are actually a lot bigger than they appear to be.
But as I say, they get smaller and smaller and smaller as you down to smaller and smaller amounts of
muscle mass.
Now, the same thing happens in exercise selection.
So if you start out with a squat or a deadlift or something like that, your voluntary activation is
going to be huge.
You're going to miss huge chunks of muscle that you just can't physically activate because you can't
get the amount of center mode command to be produced in order to recruit those motor units as you
come down to a more sort of smaller muscle muscle.
So it's like a leg press or a knee extension or a single leg extension.
First example, of course being the bilateral force deficit.
When you go from single leg, sorry, two leg to single leg, you increase the number of motor units
that are being recruited 10 percent, 15% or so, and you massively increase the amount of activation
that you can achieve.
So amount of muscle mass really in both of these examples, whether it's muscle mass per muscle or
it's muscle mass across a bunch of exercise, sorry, across the exercise that you're doing because
you need more muscles to do a more complex exercise or you need obviously 2 limbs to do a 2 limb
versus 1 limb to do A1 limb.
You find that it's literally because the brain is capping out at a certain effort perception level.
And the more central, most current descending to more places, more mode units, the earlier you're
going to hit that limit.
So what we're going to see then is that any discussion of regions and regional targeting has to take
into account the size of the muscle mass mass that you're working with.
So like it's different question to talk about biasing parts of the elbow flexor group from it is
talking about biasing parts of the hamstring muscle cream, for example, or the lat.
I mean, it's just a different animal because you're working with a completely different amount of
muscle mass in those situations, you know, so, but also if you're talking about biasing when you're
doing bench press variations or squat variations, that's a different conversation from if you're
talking about biasing when you're doing single joint triceps or single joint elbow flexion type
stuff.
You know, the conversation needs to take place in the context of voluntary activation deficit
because the bigger the voluntary activation deficit that you are working with, the more moting it's
going to get excluded, even if they have leverage.
So if you start with something like a really small amount of muscle mass, like elbow flexor type
exercise, mostly what you're going to find is that the muscle fires that get excluded, they're just
going to have any leverage at all.
And you're not going to see much of A voluntary activation deficit as a result.
In fact, some people get really exercise when I talk about voluntary activation deficits in the
context above reflexes and they go, Oh no, no, no, We've seen really tiny voluntary activation
deficits.
Therefore we don't think that there are situations, we think that every single muscle fire in the
old reflexes is activated whenever we do any kind of biceps go.
I'm like, do you not understand what a voluntary activation deficit is?
Doing not test is literally not testing muscle fibers that don't have tort producing capacity.
So if you have a situation where the muscle fires don't have an average, they won't get switched on.
There's.
So many important things you said there.
Let's, I just want to recap a couple of those things.
And the last one you're saying there, I don't know if people realize how important that is.
So you've used an example earlier of the rear delts in a row and that's what I gave it, the glass
analogy.
And you're filling up the glass with a jug of water.
And there's a difference between the rear delts in a row and the elbow flexor muscles in whatever
elbow flexor exercise you're doing.
Because what you're saying is, yes, even though the elbow flexors have a high voluntary activation,
so you can almost a whole Alba flex agree we can activate almost.
You're saying that if there's any moting units within that group that simply don't have the leverage
to do that exercise at all, then they're obviously not going to be recruited.
Whereas if we're talking about degree adults in a row, degree adults have the leverage to do that
row so that we're going to have maximum recruitment degree adults.
So that that in and of itself that tells you from an exercise selection standpoint, it tells us we
need to be looking at leverage.
We can't just be looking at voluntary activation because voluntary activation is not the whole
picture.
If there's any, like you said, if there's any bodies who don't have leverage in that movement,
voluntary activation is always going to be misleading.
We can't just be working off that.
Well, it's not going to tell you what you think it's telling you if, if you're, if you, if you
misunderstand that.
So as I say, there's been a lot of people who said, look, we found this study and it shows that, you
know, you've got, you know, sort of no voluntary activation deficit or minimal voluntary activation
deficit in the biceps brachy in this in this isometric contraction involving the LBF flexors.
And I'm like, yeah, OK.
But that doesn't mean that there aren't other elbow flexor mote units that are simply not being
switched on because they don't have any leverage for what you're trying to do.
And that's totally, you know, kind of within the scope of what we talk about when we talk about
neurochemical matching.
So I think.
So then you have people if.
You've got the way to think about it is just like if you have a voluntary activation deficit, the
only thing that you can be sure about is that there are motor units with leverage that are not being
switched on.
If you don't have a voluntary activation deficit or if it's minimal, then you can be sure that any
motor unit that has leverage is being used.
But what you can't say is that there are motor units that don't have leverage that are still being
used.
That's not a valid statement.
You know, if they are, if they are, if they have kind of if, if they're part of the same group that
they don't have leverage at that particular joint angle, then it's highly unlikely that CNS would
turn them on.
I don't believe the CNS would turn them on and you wouldn't detect that with a voluntary activation
deficit measurement.
That's the key, so.
Say you can exercise like a pull down or you got some kind of back exercise and which I know is
ironic given the conversation so far calling a back exercise.
But then you've got people saying, well, biceps, you know, obviously high level of recruitment in a
back exercise.
Therefore you're going to see biceps growth doing these back exercises and you don't actually need
to do any biceps girls.
How is that different to the example we've given with the row in the posterior delt?
Essentially what we're talking about?
Where is that glass in order of that fountain that I've suggested?
And if if the biceps cracky had the best leverage for that back exercise, then theoretically that
would be correct, wouldn't it?
You wouldn't actually need as long as in terms of the the modius that have leverage in that
particular exercise.
So again, we're getting it's a little bit confusing here.
But essentially, if if the biceps specific exercise, a single joint exercise didn't have or wasn't
recruiting mode against that had leverage that didn't have leverage in that back exercise, then you
could argue you didn't actually need a single joint biceps exercise, couldn't you?
Yeah, I think you probably could make that argument.
I mean, the end of the day, you know, you have to look at what the weak link in the exercise is, you
know, what's the, what's the, what's the, what's the muscle that is really kind of going to be the
sticking point because that's kind of where you need to start.
If you, if you're looking for the, the muscle that's going to end up with, you know, the majority of
the motin, it's being being activated.
And I don't think that's true in a case of a pull up or a pull down situation.
I don't think that the device is bracky or the elbow flexors are the limiting factor.
I say that because you can modify the pull up exercise.
I used to do this quite a lot when I was doing one on pull up training.
And you can place say for example, we have a pull up rack and you have the ability to place another
bar maybe sort of 6 to 9 inches below that first bar.
So where your, where your hands are grasping the bar, the bar, there's maybe like sort of 2/3 of the
way down your forearm, there's now another bar blocking you from going forward underneath the bar
when you do your pull up.
So essentially what it does is it turns the pull up into a sort of like sort of almost like a biceps
curl combination with a pull up because you put up maybe a pad to allow some, you know, comfort for
your, for your forearm.
But basically then just rotate and do a, a bicep score really with your body weight.
And that's a really interesting training exercise for one arm, one arm pull ups.
If you find that your elbow flex is a limitation like there were for me, you won't be able to do
anywhere near as much weight when you do that as you would if you were doing a pull up.
So I think there's some really interesting kind of tests that you can kind of play around with.
But ultimately, I think, you know, I don't think many people are going to find that their elbow
flexors of a limitation on pulling exercises most of the time.
So they're not going to be requiring them to work maximally and they're going to have that deficit
is going to be largely on those muscles really rather than it will be on something like the lap, for
example, or the posterior doctorate.
So essentially what we're talking about so far is a resource allocation issue.
Like we've got a certain amount of central motor command and regardless of whether we're talking
about exercise, we're talking about muscles, we're just talking about where are we sending that
central mode command.
Exactly.
That's really what's going on.
And you know, the the CNS is trying to make the exercise happen in the most efficient way possible.
And So what it's going to do is it's going to start with the stuff that needs activation because
it's the limitation and that has best leverage to overcome that limitation.
So you can literally state it in two sentences.
You know, so if your primary limitation in a pulling exercise is the is the shoulder extension
movement in the sagittal plane, you're going to find the posterior deltoid gets a big chunk of
activation ahead of anything else.
But the issue is we've always got to see this in the context of, you know, what muscle groups are we
dealing with?
Are we dealing with big muscle groups?
In which case we are going to have a voluntary activation deficit issue and we are going to leave O2
unit on the table because we just can't get there.
Or do we have a big muscle mass exercise issue, as in are we doing rows and pull downs and presses
and stuff like that, squats, deadlifts.
In which case again, we're going to have issues and the the more that we work with big muscle groups
in large muscle mass exercises, we're going to have a bigger voluntary activation deficit to work
with.
We're going to end up with a bigger likelihood the more regions of the muscle are going to get left
behind.
So.
Anything the size of elbow flexors than arm before these voluntary activation deficit.
Basically, yeah.
But as I say again, sliding scale.
So the more you move up the scale with so like you're using big muscle mass exercises with big
muscles, you're going to have some really big voluntary activation deficit issues.
That's where you want to focus your attention in terms of, you know, region biasing because that is
where the money is going to come from.
You know, and I think when people are talking about saying, well, I'm doing, you know, hip thrusts
for glutes and that's all I'm doing.
I'm like, if you're looking for Max glute development, you're probably going to need another
exercise.
That's not going to be everything.
Yes I think glute bridge and hip thrusts are the best glute exercise you could possibly do.
But it's a massive muscle, massive massive muscle to begin with and you are doing a multi joint
exercise.
So looking at possible ways of biasing upper and lower regions and I think the hip has already does
a decent job of biasing the lower region.
Looking at an upper region exercise like a hip abduction, C to hip abduction for example, is a very
good idea because you are straight away looking at multiple regions.
When people are looking at saying, oh, I want to try and bias multiple regions within the elbow
flexor group, you're on a totally different end of the scale then you're looking at a much smaller.
I'm not against it, absolutely not.
I've said a number of times, I think brachy radialis versus brachy is a really, really important one
to think about biasing.
Fundamentally, the amount of value you're going to get out of that extract out of that variation is
going to be a lot smaller than the amount of value you're going to extract from biasing the hip
thrust with the glute Max in a hip thrust versus a seated hip abduction.
Does that make sense?
Yeah.
And incidentally, it's a little bit unrelated, but it's related in a way that would mean that that
techniques that you're using, methods you're using to increase motor energy recruitment are going to
be potentially more effective for some of these muscles with a larger voluntary deficit, activation
deficit than say something like the Bisys, Jackie.
So if you were using argument to something like that, that potential would make more sense for
quads.
Yeah.
I mean you could find yourself going off the end of what you need to go on need to do, if that makes
sense.
So you know, if you've if you've, if you're trying to maximize growth in the other effects complex
and you know, you've picked a couple of exercises that you think 1 targets Brachybidialis and the
other targets prices Brachy and you're kind of asking yourself, do I need something to target the
Brachialis as well?
You might find that the value that you're able to extract there is really small because you've kind
of almost capped out the Brachialis already because you are so close.
It would only really apply if you genuinely didn't have any motive units that have leverage for
those other two movements in the Brachialis itself.
Do you see how that works?
So it's, it's like the, the value you can extract is progressively smaller and smaller and smaller
the less muscle mass you're using and the smaller the muscles are that you're trying to target.
So if you consider it like for example, we talked at the beginning of this podcast about shoulder
development with the choice of lots of different exercises for the shoulders.
You know, the issue that you've got there is that, you know, we've got a very complex sort of muscle
group that does a lot of different things.
Now this brings another dimension to it because if you have a muscle group that has extremely
divergent functions as parts, then there's a higher probability that you're going to have motions
that simply don't have any leverage at all for some of the things that you're doing.
So I mean, pretty obvious example, if you're doing some kind of the transverse plane pressing X
size, bench pressing X size, you know you're not going to get anything on the posterior side of that
delta complex doing anything at all.
Whereas if you're working in the frontal plane, there's a high probability that you're going to get
some stuff from the posterior side working as well as some of the stuff from the anterior side
working.
The the issue here is that when you've got big divergent organists sort of sort of start to see
losses happening more, you know, obviously in that in that scenario, so.
This should, this would be a lot simpler if we had this information which we don't which be imagine
you've got 100% of the vet of possible total mode innocent muscle.
And then if we're able to say in what I've exercised, let's say 80%, we've got a voluntary
activation of of, you know, potentially 80%.
But then we're saying that or if we work the other way, we say 90% of these mod units have leverage
in this exercise, but then we've only got voluntary activation of 70% of those.
So if we're able to actually.
That's a really good way of looking at it.
Actually, it's a really good way of looking at it.
So it's like saying, you know, again, going back to the glute example, you might say, you know, the
problem we've got is actually primarily voluntary activation deficit related because you might say,
well, the upper glue is actually a pretty decent hip extensor, so it could contribute pretty well if
it were allowed to.
You can't get it to because you can't get that high.
So what's going to happen is that the CNS is going to just recruit all the lower glue as much as it
possibly can and then move into the upper glue until it caps out.
It could carry on if you had the ability to carry on going, but you can't.
Yeah.
See, that would be really interesting information because then what you could say, because if if we
have an issue where you've got, let's say it's like the glass analogy, can glass holds 100 mil, but
you've only got 80 mils of water.
This is a central motor command issue.
Then what you would do is you would just say do single limb or you do something that just means
there's less muscle mass being used.
But if we're saying, well, it's not a matter of how much water, it's a matter of some of those
motions aren't able to, just don't have leverage, Well then it's not about reducing the amount of
muscle mass, it's about actually doing something different entirely.
It is, but equally, if you were to stick with the shoulder example, you could still do a whole bunch
of different pressing exercises in all kinds of weird directions and you still have a voluntary
activation deficit problem because it's just a lot of muscle mass that you're using.
So again, you've still got the same issue.
It's just that your priorities have changed.
You know, in the case of the glute, your priority is largely voluntary activation problem because
you just can't get there with the case.
The shoulder, your issue is primarily AI can't use these motor units because the brain won't switch
them on because they just don't have any leverage.
But I also have a voluntary activation problem.
So if I do a whole bunch of different pressing exercises, I'm still not maxing out my potential in
those situations.
So then you kind of starting to go looking at why sig line might have had so many weird different
shoulder exercises because that's pretty much the only way you can get to the point where you can
really maximize all the development of that muscle route because you've got a deficit.
If you use bigger muscle mass exercises, if you start using single limb, you know, exercise, you get
a lot closer.
And if you start using single joint stuff like he's doing these front raises, these left raises,
starting to move into the territory where he's trying to maximize regions specific of hypertrophy in
that way.
So it's it's fundamentally impossible that someone could say I can do this single exercise and
maximize development in X muscle.
The only where you risk flex risk risk curls.
You could probably argue that for you really wanted to I'm not sure it really is true because I
think you still have a motive.
I think you still have a neurochemical matching issue.
But broadly speaking, I mean it just if somebody thinks you can do one exercise and maximize growth
for a a whole muscle like a lat, they don't understand voluntary activation deficits and they don't
understand the principle of neurochemical matching.
I mean, that's just how it is because if you've got voluntary activation deficit, you are not
recruiting all the motor units.
And so straight away they could say, oh this, this rowing excise or this pull down recruits, the
whole lot.
Straight away.
I can prove you wrong because I can literally do it one arm and I've just activated more motor
units.
That's all you need to know exactly.
You don't even need straight.
Away they're wrong.
No, I can do it from bilateral force deficit.
I can literally tell you you're wrong because I can just switch to a single arm variation and I've
just recruited more motor units.
So straight away, anybody saying that this exercise recruits the whole pack or this exercise
recruits the whole lot just simply wrong because the bilateral force deficit proves you're wrong.
And you can do it yourself in a gym and prove that it's correct because you'll get more reps for the
same relative.
You know, kind of take, you know, 50% of the weight and you get more reps if you do it single
inversion or you know, if you're doing 2 separate, you know, dumbbells is probably the more accurate
way of thinking about if you're doing a pressing version.
But then from a new mechanical machine point of view, you know, you're going to have a whole bunch
of Moat units that just don't have leverage, so don't get switched on.
I mean, I don't understand people when they say, well, we think that these Moat units will get
switched on even though they don't have leverage.
I'm like, in what universe would an animal have evolved to do that?
That makes no sense at all.
It literally is evolving to be less efficient than another animal that doesn't do that.
So it's just not going to happen.
But.
It's, I mean, that's, that's a really important point because I don't know that people understand
that either.
Like it actually will disadvantage that Organism to do that.
And so you like, how could that adaption actually persist?
Because if it could even occur in adaption, it wins.
So of course it's going to literally pass on that better adaption.
So you just couldn't, we couldn't get to this endpoint.
Couldn't even get to that point in the 1st place, you know, So very, very strange.
So, yeah, from deficit point of view and also from a numerical commercial point of view, you can't
have a situation where an exercise is doing everything is not.
And just to be 100% clear on this, if somebody says, Oh well, I'm not arguing that it perfectly
trains it maximally, I'm just saying that it will maintain.
I'm like, well then you don't understand the size principle.
Yes, because, you know, literally what we're saying here is that, you know, if a exercise is
producing a smaller stimulus, the only way it can do that is by not recruiting some of the motor
units.
Again, people are thinking that a muscle is like this homogeneous thing that you can train.
Oh, this exercise trains that muscle.
Come on.
That's not his bodybuilding talk.
You know, that's not what we're doing here.
You know, that's not the way the CNS works and that's not the way the exercise selection works.
You know, if you're getting a smaller stimulus, it's because you're recruiting fewer motions,
mechanical tension in the single fibers that are activated, that task failure is going to be
identical because the velocity were the same.
So the only thing that changes is the number of fibers that are being activated.
And so the stimulus is less because you're not drinking as many fibers, you're not recruiting as
many motions, chunks of the foot of the muscle are not being used.
So you cannot say that all, well, no, it's just a maintenance stimulus.
That's rubbish, just absolutely garbage idea.
It can't possibly be true.
Yeah, a muscle fibers either getting this same stimulus that would have God no, it's not getting any
stimulus.
Exactly, exactly.
You know, So, you know, I think where we end up is that there is a sliding scale or a graded
progression and people can really, I mean, if you're listening to this and you're actually following
along and you're thinking this is sounds, this sounds interesting, this sounds really cool.
How can I use this?
This is huge.
If you want to go and play with this, you could do some really interesting work because what you
could figure out is that there's basically a like a grading system for every scenario in which you
would start to try and bias regions.
Biasing regions is going to be so much more effective where you have either the potential for a big
voluntary activation deficit, you're dealing with big muscles, or you're dealing with a muscle area
group like the delts where you have massively divergent functions of the motor units in that group.
You know, So if you've got very homogeneous kind of group like, you know, so the quadriceps, you're
not going to see a lot of variation happening.
Now, you know, you can kind of get into arguments about how much variation you think there might be,
but ultimately, you know, it's very, very homogeneous delts, very, very inhomogeneous, very, very
different functions of the different parts of that muscle group.
So you can start to put all of your muscles that you're training on a sliding scale and go, you
know, down.
At this end I'm expecting to see lots and lots of problems, and at this end I'm expecting to see
relatively small problems.
Interestingly, discussions over the last kind of couple of years on this topic have tended to focus
on stuff in the middle and at the end, which doesn't probably benefit that much.
So people have argued till the, you know, as we would say in England till the cows come home about,
you know, whether the lat can be biased and regions, the lat can be biased and to a lesser extent,
whether the PEC regions can be biased.
And, and they've argued about sections of the triceps and biceps.
And I would say what you're arguing there is about stuff in the, in the middle and at the least
likely to benefit end.
You really want to get into the areas that are going to benefit.
You need to be thinking about the bigger muscle groups which have divergent functions.
You know, so we'd be thinking more like deltoids and, you know, hamstrings, you know, glutes, you
know, stuff that has like the capacity to have a big voluntary activation deficit or a meaningful
voluntary activation deficit and yet has divergent functions.
I actually think the PEC is a really interesting one.
I think we undersell the PEC a lot in this regard because we go, Oh well, look, you know, all three
regions of the PEC can do transverse plane, you know, sort of horizontal reflection, so or
horizontal adduction depending on how you want to define it.
They can all do that.
The interesting kind of use of terminology they can all.
Do that.
Well, yeah, they can.
They have motor units that can perform that function.
Can you get them all to be switched on at the same time?
No, you can't.
So what are you losing?
Well, are you going to lose the ones that have the worst relative leverage?
And it means that you, your sternal region is going to get a really, really high stimulus.
You're going to miss a little bit at the top end of the clavicular.
You're going to miss a little bit of the bottom end of the of the of the coastal and that's just how
it's going to work.
Now if you go from transverse plane bench press down to PEC deck, you're going to benefit because
you've just changed the voluntary activation deficit, so.
What's interesting with that is if you had an exercise that was like you use the example of say a
PEC deck, and it is there's multiple regions that have good leverage for that, well, you can make an
argument that would be a really good exercise to do unilaterally.
Yeah, fantastically so fantastically so because you've you've taken out that really big factor that
was limiting you in that situation.
Even then, I think maybe there's an argument.
So we might still be losing a little bit to the top end of the curriculum.
Sure, you should be losing, but don't you think if you're writing an abbreviated plan and you'd
absolutely bang for bar, you could pick an exercise that's using a lot of different muscle regions
and do it?
I agree.
I agree.
I agree.
But this is what I'm saying when I say if somebody's following along here and they want to start to
think practically about how to bring value to this space and think about classifying exercise, they
could do some amazing matrix style allocation.
This exercise in this category.
There's some really interesting work to be done here.
I'm going to, I'm going to follow that and you're going to bring out a plan because I think actually
that's an opportunity.
You know, if you could only do 7 exercises in a full body or whatever it is, you know, time
permitting, I think that's that's a really interesting way to use exercise selection.
Yeah, I think that the single on peg deck is a perfect example of what we're talking about here.
I mean, I think that is one of the the best exercises that would sort of the best examples of how
you're fighting against that voluntary activation deficit in the context of a, because ultimately
what I'm getting at here is you couldn't do the same thing with a lateral raise.
So we're talking, right.
OK.
So just if you've got the PEC, you've got three separate regions and okay, there's like we talked
about at the beginning, you can go Russian doll effect and you can start talking about individual
sections of individual sections of individual sections until you get down to motor unit level,
ultimately noting it's the only thing that matters.
But that's by the by, you've got three major anatomical regions of the delt.
So essentially what we've got there is a comparable scenario.
We're talking about the horizontal movement for the PEC and doing the PEC deck and we're talking
about the vertical movement doing the lateral rays.
Technically those are comparable situations.
You've got the curricular internal and coastal pecs, and you're doing your horizontal flexion
movement for the pack, and you're probably capturing a big chunk of the motions in all three
regions.
You don't have to raise.
You're not going to get the same thing.
You're not going to get the posterior, anterior, and middle delts all contributing to that lateral
raise, despite the fact that essentially you're doing the same thing in two different planes.
But if you did it for the quads if the leg extension, you will and.
The reason for that is because we've got very, very divergent functions of the motor units in the
delt compared to the PEC.
So this is keep this is coming back to this problem that we've got.
We've always got a voluntary activation problem and we've always got a motor equipment problem from
numerical matching point of view.
And the problems are going to be a slightly different size according to which muscle group you are
working with and what exercise you're doing.
So ultimately, if you were to say, well, OK, so if I'm doing single arm PEC deck, why wouldn't I
then also do single on lateral raises And like, well, because probably in the lateral raise there's
not that many MOTI and it's being recruited anyway because there's just not many motions have
leverage to do that thing.
You've got more of the opposite problem.
So really if you can identify muscles that have these leverages differences, then you're going to be
better off with a higher number of of excise variation.
And if it's more of a voluntary activation deficit issue, then unilateral is probably going to be as
valuable, if not more valuable than actually different exercises.
Yeah.
I think if you've got an exercise that has the if you have an exercise like the peg deck, which has
the weight for, for which a lot of muscle regions have great leverage, yeah, you're probably going
to want to have a unilateral variation because otherwise you're just going to be missing stuff off
the top.
And not because you not because the brain doesn't want to activate it just because brain can't.
That's really if you want to.
If you want to put it in simplest possible terms, you would say one problem is the brain wants to
but can't and the other, the other problem is that the brain doesn't want to because there's no
point.
And you know, and that's, that's the situation.
So like in the situation of the of the pack deck, the brain wants to activate more motives.
It just can't show a voluntary activation deficit issue.
And in the case they'll have to raise, the brain just doesn't want to because there's no point in
doing that.
I.
Think this is very interesting.
This is a whole different lens one can use when looking at exercise selection.
I think this is ultimately what happens when you kind of just riff off the Physiology and you just
start with what Physiology is telling you must be the case and you just start exploring, you know,
kind of where it takes you.
And I think this is where Physiology based analysis of strength training is so powerful because you
start with principles and then you just keep going and following them to the end of the string.
And in many situations, you know, I haven't been to the end of some of these strings, you know, and
I think some people get surprised by that.
It's like, well, that's because that's just not what I do.
I, I focus on always trying to figure out what Physiology is saying.
Now when people then ask me questions about, well, how does that apply in the strength training
situation?
I then start applying it live and then I find things that I haven't found before because, you know,
I just never thought about it because it's just not my area of speciality.
I'm not really, you know, a kind of a fitness influencer in that respect.
I'm, I'm a physiologist who happens to talk about this stuff on the Internet.
So I think this is, yeah, this is an amazing opportunity.
I think as we've talked through it, I've realized just how valuable this could be for people to.
Well, you know what's going to happen.
We're going to hang up and I'm going to have half a dozen more questions for you and we're going to
spin the national web shopping this.
But yes, I think it does sound like there's a lot of mileage in this and we could always do a follow
up if people have questions.
I think this has probably been a what I would describe as a rough and ready sort of draft of these
ideas.
I think I can probably find some better ways of communicating some of this stuff.
But yeah, this has been fun.
Well, you know, what's going to happen out of this is I'm pretty confident we're going to keep
talking about this and we're going to identify these are the muscles exercises where it makes a lot
more sense to the unilateral and these are the ones where it doesn't.
And I think what we're going to see is because at the moment, I feel like unilateral exercise is
applied really haphazardly.
It's just like, let's just throw this there.
Let's use this for this exercise.
Like I don't feel like there's a lot of continuity or even logic behind when 1 uses them or when
they don't because obviously we.
Don't know.
To be fair, you can use it all the way down to the elbow flexor complex.
I mean you, you can use it for everything down if and it will have an effect.
I mean we know it does have an effect.
You mean you can test it for yourself doing biceps curls with alternating Dumbo curls and you can
see that?
The effect is going to be, so the.
Effect is going to be so much smaller than it would be for, you know, a bigger muscle mass exercise
so.
I think what we'll do is we'll identify some exercises where just logically kind of almost always
makes sense just to do it.
There's definitely going to be a sort of a graded effect where the effect is going to get.
I mean, just trying to think things through carefully, but at the bottom end, if you take things
down to a really tiny amount of muscle mass, you're not going to see any effect at all because
you're already maxing out.
So there's nothing.
So as you, as you come past the elbow flexor complex, you're going to see an effect there.
You should see an increasing effect.
And then if I'm modeling this correctly in my head as I'm thinking about it, it should plateau
because there's only a certain amount of extra motor command that you can create.
So, yeah, So what should happen you, what you should see is a is a curvilinear line where you have
nothing happening at the the lowest end, the smallest amount of muscle mass.
If you're doing finger exercises or something like that, you shouldn't see any shouldn't see a
bilateral force deficit effect really down the end.
And as you climb to bigger amounts of muscle mass, you should see a relatively fast increase in the
bilateral force deficit.
And or not just a bilateral force deficit, but the amount of muscle mass you're using should change
the amount of moutine equipment you can achieve relative to the maximum amount that exists.
But then it should take taper off because you should actually find that there isn't anywhere else to
go because there's only a certain amount more moutine equipment you can physically create.
So what you might find is that above like, I don't know, Peck size, there isn't anywhere else to
really go with it.
What I'm saying is it might be the case that the problem is just as big for the Peck as it is for
glute.
Do you see what I'm saying?
Yeah.
You'll get the maximum return at a certain point, but it's still you're still going to get that same
value.
So it's as big as what I'm saying is what we, what we might find, I need to think this through.
What we might find is that there isn't a bigger impact on the compared to say the PEC, for example.
Yeah, because there's only.
It's like you only get that if.
The central motor command isn't enough.
Like if doing half of that muscle is doing the the unilateral.
Isn't enough to get you to maximum.
Limited.
You're still limited by the same thing and I think that would be the case for the biggest muscles,
certainly.
So I think you probably would plateau at a certain point.
But it still is giving you the best opportunity you've got.
Like it still will make sense to do that, yeah.
Absolutely.
I'm just saying I don't think I need to really just kind of model this out in my head, but I don't
think it would be different once you got above a certain size I.
Mean even the pets.
I don't think it's going to solve all that problems.
It's not going to mean that you you might still benefit from doing a, say, clavicular peg focused
exercise, a bias exercise.
But the magnitude of the benefit is going to be smaller and that's the key thing.
So like the difference between saying, well, if I do three shoulder exercises and I do three peg
exercises, that's a totally different animal.
That's the issue.
And that's what I think this SIG Climb program was really perfect for demonstrating is that if
you've got muscles groups to have extremely divergent functions within them, you're going to have a
way bigger motivation to look for a whole bunch of different exercises than you would do if you
have, you know, kind of muscles that have regions that are all doing similar things.
But that's where you're going to chase the voluntary activation deficit issue.
So the lats as an example, they're going to fall more towards the voluntary activation deficit side,
the.
Lats are kind of halfway in between the two.
The PEC and the delt are kind of like either ends of a spectrum, not a pure spectrum here.
Quit still dealing with a kind of they are pushing ends of that spectrum.
I'd say that's in the middle.
So you've got both problems at the same time, I would say.
So like an exercise that I know everyone's very in love with at the moment.
The Canon flap.
I'm sure you've probably seen it if you're familiar.
Describe it for us.
I've never done it so it's doing a lap pull down and in the front in.
The front of the plane.
Yeah, and taking out any elbow movement, so it's using.
Like a So it's like a pullover.
It's like a pullover but a frontal plane version.
Yeah, I apologize if I've explained that incorrectly.
Kanan and anyone else who use it as an.
Aside, I think naming exercises after yourself probably needs to stop because all it does is mean
that people who don't like you don't use it.
I didn't name the stimulating reps model after me.
I could easily have done that.
Other people have done similar things and named after themselves.
You know, if you name something after yourself, you are limiting how much people will use it.
If you name something, something that you know, like Brett Contreras probably is in terms of
exercise selection, the most influential SNC coach, fitness influencer on planet.
In terms of introducing an exercise, he didn't name it after himself.
He could have done.
He talked about it.
He's talked about how he could have named after himself and he didn't, you know.
And you know, as a result, partly as a result of that, obviously the success of that exercise is
because it works.
But I think that he helped that exercise succeed because he didn't name it after himself.
You know, I think it's a very short term approach to name an exercise after yourself because people
who don't like you will not use it.
If you want a widespread adoption of a concept, of an idea, of a belief, of an exercise, don't name
it after yourself.
You know, all you're doing is taking a short term approach to it.
So I think just as a general observation and I'm not criticizing the person in specific case here.
Well, to be I was quickly mentioned.
I don't know whether he even named it.
It's possible that someone's identified him.
Exactly and then applied exactly, you know, you know, it may not even be his initiation.
So but the point still stands, which is that if an excise gets named after somebody, then people who
don't like that person will just argue against it for the sake of being argument and as against that
person.
So as I say, I think one of the reasons why the hip thrust has had global success and is the success
story about getting a new exercise, you know, into common usage is because it was named something
very, very generic.
And I think that principle definitely applies.
So if you know, I don't know what to say at this point other than what I've said, but that's that's
just something I've noticed over the last couple of decades of seeing this, this this play out.
So to go to the exercise itself, to the.
Exercising question.
No, exactly.
I mean, it's a, it's a really cool idea because essentially by taking out some muscle mass that you
don't, you know, need for training the muscle that you're trying to train, you raise the potential
for increasing the amount of motive equipment in the target area.
So absolutely functional in the same way that I mean really it's the same logic as the the PEC deck
versus the transverse plane bench press because you're it's the.
Same logic, but doesn't have the same effect and that's why I asked you.
Are the lats falling more on the deficit side than on the leverage side?
Well, I think you've got things upside down because the PEC has all three regions that can
contribute to horizontal flexion or adduction, depending on how you want to classify it.
So the issue there is it's, it's a pure volunteer activation issue.
Yes, adults it's almost exactly the opposite.
It's almost a pure kind of varying function issue.
But the lat being both at the same time, you can have both issues.
So ultimately you're going to find that you have got a voluntary activation problem, and you've
probably also got a divergent function problem.
Yeah.
So the cane in fact does not solve the problem in the same way that a single limb unilateral PEC
it's.
Single limb?
Isn't it single in variation?
Yes.
Well, yeah, no, I know.
But that's what my point is that if we're looking at the pecs like you said, obviously clinically
our coastal stern will all have really good leverage for that movement.
But you're saying if we're doing single lane frontal plane it's.
Solve.
It's solving the voluntary activation problem, solving half of it for the lumbar and pelvic lats.
It's not going to touch the thoracic lat because the thoracic lat doesn't do anything.
Yeah.
Or if it's very, very little.
So it's kind of falling halfway between the adult issue and the.
So I wouldn't say there's no point in doing it.
There is a point in doing it because no, no, no.
That's.
Not what I'm getting out.
I was just, it was more when people are saying, do we need multiple exercises for lats?
Had there not been a leverage issue, one could argue, well, maybe if you were doing something
unilaterally, we're taking out a lot of muscle mass, maybe you could get away with just one
exercise.
But what you're saying here is no, no, we've got this leverage.
Issue you got a leverage, you've still got a leverage issue you are, you are going to find and but
it won't be as big in a leverage issue as the dealt.
Yeah.
So, so with a lot to raise, it's like nobody on the planet I hope thinks that a lateral raise is
going to give them anterior and posterior as well as middle delt development.
I hope that's true.
The reason is because they've got very divergent functions and everybody can see that it's really
screamingly obvious.
PEC is the opposite and that's where the problem is.
The full interactivation issue, the LAT is halfway in between.
So you kind of can see that there's a logic to going down the route of essentially doing a single
arm PEC deck, which is what this kind of exercise that you described to us as doing more or less,
but in sort of frontal plane add deduction for the LAT.
But it probably still doesn't get you all the way into the thoracic part of the lab because it's
just too divergent to function.
It's less of a divergent function than you'll see with a Dell, but it's still a divergent function.
I've.
Got one more question.
OK.
I'm aware we've gone way over, so I'm not going to keep us going for too much longer, but I do get
this question all the time.
And in this context I think it's interesting.
So people will ask what do I need to maximize quadricep development?
And usually the question will be, do I need a leg extension and a squad?
And obviously we could talk about psychogenesis and if someone sets up the lead extension in the
right way, then they might be able to achieve some of that stretch mediated hypertrophy.
So let's assume that they're able to do so.
Well, if someone was saying I'm just doing a leg extension, is that enough?
And you know, obviously maximize is a tricky word, but is that enough to get, you know, very, very
high levels of development?
But based on our conversations so far, I would be inclined to say, well, if you're adjusting a leg
extension and your goal is to kind of just do as little as possible to get as much development as
possible, you may be better off just doing a single limb leg extension than actually adding in a
second exercise like a squad.
Of course.
I mean that's that's the thing.
It's like if you do a single limb knee extension exercise, I think that is probably the one that's
going to give you the most chance at maximizing quadriceps development.
Personally, I think that the knee extension prioritizes the rect fem.
There's long term training data suggesting the rect fem grows preferentially to the other muscles.
Now the only real way that can happen is if the lack of motin recruitment is being experienced by
the the the single joint quadriceps.
So you obviously don't see that with a with a the leg press because the rectum isn't working or a
squat because the rectum isn't working.
So my preference really, and you know, people have pointed out that, you know, this is divergent
from a lot of other people who are following my model, that I would prefer to have both a single leg
leg press and a single leg knee extension.
But if you had to choose only one, it would always be the single leg knee extension because you
don't get any rec fem in the leg press or squat.
But as I say, if you look at long term training data, you will find that the rec fem outgrows the
other quadriceps muscles in the extension training and that for me suggests that is not allowing
full recruitment of those single joint quadriceps in the knee extension exercise.
What if the scenario were you've got a leg extension and then someone says if I want to grow more of
the quads minus react fam, should I add in like a bilateral squat or leg press or?
Bilateral, that's the interesting question, isn't it?
I mean single leg for me, it's not really very difficult to answer the question.
I would straight away say, well my my approach would always be single leg leg press, single leg nail
tension.
That for me is you've covered everything.
If you're saying to me, well I can't do single leg leg press, I want to do 2 leg leg press.
I'm like well seriously.
Because honestly it takes less time to set up to do single leg and you can probably do it in more
machines.
You can probably do single leg leg press in a selectorized machine.
Probably.
Unless you're absurdly strong, you can probably use a selectorized machine.
You're probably going to need to use a kind of loadable plate loadable machine to do 2 leg leg
press.
Aren't you though?
Honestly if you're saying to me, well I don't want to do single leg leg press because it takes more
time.
I'm saying I bet you it doesn't.
I bet you it takes more time to do the two leg if you can't load the device.
Yeah, yeah, I can.
I.
Can go to, I can get I can get 2 lots of single leg, I get both sides, single leg, leg press, single
leg knee extension done in absolutely no time no.
No, I get that.
I understand.
It's it's not really, I think.
You're arguing a theoretical.
Yes, yes.
But I, I guess what I find interesting about it is this is potentially a situation where one
exercise would be better than two.
If that one exercise were unilateral and the two exercises weren't, it's just another.
I think it's just another layer to think about.
You don't.
Really don't know because it would depend on which ones you're comparing.
If you're, if you're saying to me that you're comparing two leg, well, a bilateral knee extension,
yeah.
No, no, a unilateral leg extension.
I'm saying that one exercise probably better for overall quad development than a bilateral leg
extension and a bilateral leg press.
That's really tough.
But you might be right.
You might be right.
That's, that's very tough because you're changing 2 variables at the same time, aren't you?
Because what you're saying is that you, you, you lose what you're losing in the case of the single
joint quadriceps because the rectum is taking over or still not going to get back that from the two
leg leg press because there's too big a voluntary activation deficit.
That's totally valid.
That's totally valid.
You could argue that, but again, we don't.
I don't know of any data that would enable us to get close to that.
But big voluntary activation, deficits flying around, lots of muscle mass, lots big, big muscles
being used.
It's entirely possible.
Okay, that's I'm going to start quizzing you on these very specific exercise questions.
Is there anything else you wanted to finished with before we wrap up?
No, I'm I'm.
I'm definitely you're.
Definitely done.
OK, OK, thank you guys for listening.
I hope you found that as enjoyable as me.
Maybe it was just me, I'm not sure, but I do hope you'll you'll join us again next week.