Episode: 016 Training Splits - Why upper/lower, torso/limbs, push/pull, and other split routines face the same problem
URL: https://open.spotify.com/episode/1h2nMAbZ8zZBu63TPr0LY3
Published: 2025-09-08
================================================================================

Welcome back everyone to another episode of Hypertrophy, past and present.
Good morning, good evening, good afternoon.
Wherever you are.
Chris, how are you?
My morning, your night.
Tis tis my late evening over here.
I'm doing very well, thank you.
I hear you were sitting through an electrical storm just a moment ago, so hopefully your Internet
holds up.
Yes, hopefully.
So please bear with us if any problems arise.
It was pretty impressive, but you know, par for the course really.
So let's jump into it.
Let's get straight and cracking.
Today I have a plan from Joe we need to talk about.
Now I don't know if we've talked about Joe, but I think his name's come up a few times and then we
haven't discussed any specific plans from him yet, which I think is quite impressive actually.
We've made it this far without talking about him too much because he's obviously one of the most
recognizable names in the silver and then into the golden era of bodybuilding.
Now, one of the interesting things with Joe, obviously he sort of had a, what would you say, sort of
a, a posse of bodybuilders he acquired over time.
And he was definitely known as as quite a marketer.
And part of his mission or his his sort of strategy was to promote these sort of, you know, new
ways, new methods of doing bodybuilding.
And he would publicize these in his magazine.
And he would get sort of, you know, leading bodybuilders of the time.
He got Arnold under his wing and he would promote sort of his methods with these very big names to
try to I guess in essence, kind of take over the bodybuilding world with his methods, and he
published the Wieder methods and this sort of evolved over time and he was in direct competi
competition with Bob Hoffman, and we've talked about a lot of Bob Hoffman's plans.
You know, waiter was was very big in sort of pushing bodybuilding more towards what we know
bodybuilding to be today in this sort of, you know, more down the kind of pageant way of doing
things as opposed to this strength sport, you know, kind of strength athlete, Olympic lifting type
stuff that Bob Hoffman was doing.
So there's a lot kind of that Wade is responsible for and how this is shaped up over time.
And again, Wade are influential marketer.
He would often promote sort of new cutting edge strategies that sort of undermined what else is
being done at the time.
So, you know, if you read his his magazines, it's almost like he's having a back and forth with Bob
Hoffman a lot of the time where he's, he's not naming him directly, but he's speaking directly to
something that Bob has just put out of, you know, something they've just published or a method that
he's just talked about.
And Wade is largely responsible for a lot of their kind of push toward not just higher volume in
terms of the set system, but also in terms of splits.
And he did sort of popularize a lot of splits that didn't emerge, you know, coming into the golden
era and even at the at the end late stages of the silver era, Weeder was certainly promoting some
very early iterations of split training at that point.
So when people think about Joe Weeder, they often sort of associate him with this kind of more, you
know, split type system routines.
That's like what Arnold was doing and yet he did actually start off as a huge promoter of full body.
So the plan we're going to talk about today is actually a plan that was published in his 1st 1940
issue of his of his magazine.
Now it wasn't written by Joe.
This plan is written by Jim Bell, but it was in Joe Readers Magazine.
And what I thought was interesting about this was to go back and look at this guy.
He's so well recognized for promoting splits and even he was actually promoting full body training
early on.
So this plan standard kind of structure three times a week full body, it was a single set.
So this is a single set of five to 10 repetitions.
So very much mirroring what we've seen with some of Bob Hoffman's plans for even even stuff like the
the Milo Barbell company, their plan was quite similar with that single set of five to 10.
So this is a very, I guess, common structure at this time.
So we start off with a standing barbell curl, then we go into a barbell shrug, a vertical shrug into
a bent over barbell row, and you'll be happy about this one.
You've got a stiff leg barbell deadlift into an alternating overhead dumbbell shoulder press into a
barbell squat, which I think was super settled with a barbell pullover.
They tended to do those back-to-back.
And then we've got a neck exercise.
Now this was a little bit difficult to do.
Usually you had a pardon or you could do it with a towel, but basically you're doing like neck
circles with some resistance and then they went into a Jefferson or like a straddle lift and into a
seated calf raise.
So we've got 10 exercises in all and being the neck exercise and a single set of five to 10
repetitions with the exception of the neck.
They they did that for is a time duration as opposed to a certain number of repetitions.
This is this is really interesting.
When you first turned it over to me, I, I thought it was relatively generic, but actually the more I
look at it, the more I see things to talk about.
Before I talk about exercise select, I just wanted to focus on this structure of the program because
firstly, we're dealing with sets of, or in the case, obviously they're singles, we're dealing with
sets where we're doing 5 to 10 repetitions.
And, and, and in the notes that you sent over, it says with as much weight as possible.
So this is really, you know, it couldn't be more perfect for the kind of, you know, the shift that
we've been talking about for the over the last couple of years, as we've been saying, look, you
know, to avoid post workout fatigue, you actually want to be doing that heavy or moderately heavy,
moderate, say heavy being maybe 1:00 to 5:00 and then moderately heavy being that sort of 6 to 10.
So heavy or moderately heavy kind of weights.
And you know, we can see that being done by this group of people clearly, you know, in 1950s as well
pre, you know, kind of the anabolic era.
Really, really important anecdotal evidence there for, you know, the optimal kind of Rep range that
we want to be using.
Then couple that with the fact that they're doing 3 workouts per week, 3 full body workouts per
week, and they're doing single sets.
So that that again is, you know, such a really nice resonance with what we've been talking about
with the higher frequency full body training approach.
Now, you know, not saying that everyone should do single sets three times a week, but it is a really
good program.
You know, you can do two or three sets as we'll talk about later on today.
But the point is that three times a week, full body programs, single sets is just such a such a good
way of training and that it's nice to see that was one of the kind of the early sort of programs
presented in that in that magazine.
Now looking at the exercise selection straightaway, it contrasts a lot with the kind of the sundown
focus on pressing.
So we literally just got the one pressing exercise, which I think is very strange, very, very
interesting.
Then counterpoint to that, we've actually got 2 deadlift variations in here.
You know, we've got the Jefferson lift and we've also got the stiff leg deadlifts.
Again, these are differences with some of the other programs that we've seen and it's interesting to
again speculate on why that might have been.
You know, 2 deadlift variations here, one which is more hamstrings focused and one is perhaps a
little bit more sort of I would classify as generic hip extensor has a really interesting choice.
As you said to me when you sent it over, there's no kind of pull ups in there.
So I'm going to be disappointed, but you know, there is there is a decent chunk of back in there.
We've got a shrug, we've got a bent over row, you know, and you could argue a little bit of, you
know, the deadlift variations on the pullover might kind of fill in a bunch of gaps there too.
So I'm seeing like a definitive lack of pressing here as being my main kind of criticism.
I guess obviously, you know, bench press at this point wasn't super popular I guess anyway, but.
Yeah.
I think we're just a little bit too early, yeah.
Yeah.
But ultimately, I think this definitely does contrast and I guess as we start to look at more and
more of these programs as you bring more of these for us to consider, you know, maybe the exercise
selection is just a personal thing.
You know, I mean, we have seen some interesting trends there whereby, you know, you've seen people
put together plans that have some really nice Excel exercise selections where they fit together
wonderfully, where you can go.
They're doing this for this region and this for this region.
It just works together brilliantly, you know, and then you look at a program like this and like this
reads like somebody who is trying to develop certain parts of the body and is not particularly
bothered about other parts.
You know, that doesn't seem to be a very big focus on pressing triceps really, I would say is
definitively lacking.
PEC is apart from the pullover really, really going to suffer from this program.
And then of course the other stuff that is machine specific is obviously missing as well.
I mean, are these the kind of thoughts that you are having as well?
Yeah.
I do think we are seeing that that point in time where maybe we just haven't seen a shift more
towards PEC development.
And so maybe that's why that's sort of missing out.
It was interesting because obviously we tend to see a lot of like hamstring work tends to be
neglected and we've actually got some here and we've got, you know, like you said, a bit of back
work as well, which tends to be what was dropped out.
So that is interesting.
And I do think, you know, maybe not until the late 40s when, you know, these bodybuilding
competitions becoming a little bit more popular, maybe that's where we start to see more of these
balanced Fanny programs emerge.
And I think up until that point, yes, people are still modeling off, you know, Sandow or whatever
they have in mind.
And maybe the judging in their more general perception of what a bodybuilder should look like just
hasn't quite emerged at this stage.
No, that's really interesting.
Absolutely.
So I mean, when we first started these podcasts, I think the very first episode, you talked us
through the process that Sundown I believe went through in order to establish what he was trying to
achieve.
It was like he went to measurements and tried to figure out what would be necessary to achieve those
particular physiques.
So you can kind of then use that as a template and go, well, if they were doing that then for that
purpose, then later on, as you said, maybe like 50s or whatever, you start to see guidelines and
judging and people starting to train for the test if you like.
Then maybe there's a period of time in between that where it's kind of like, well, there's nothing
really driving anybody towards a particular outcome, so.
No man's land.
There's a yeah, it's like a people are just kind of doing stuff that they like.
So maybe you that's what we're seeing here.
Maybe we're just seeing a bit of preference coming in or some other factors that aren't being
directed towards specific outcomes, which ultimately would suggest that these are of less of less
value to us in terms of understanding connecting anecdotal evidence with kind of outcomes that those
anecdotes achieved.
Because if you look at sundown, you go, well, he was trying to achieve these things and he chose
those exercises to achieve those things.
Then that's really, really nice sort of connected set of data.
And then you look at maybe the judging standards of the 50s and you go, that's what they were
looking for and these are the exercises they were doing to meet those requirements.
Again, you've got connected data when you look at this like, well, what are they trying to do?
What do you what do you make of these neck circles, these neck exercises?
Because this tended to be something that was quite popular at this this point in time.
You see this in in sort of the bronze era and then coming up into the 40s and then you see almost
all the drop off in the 50s.
Yeah.
So I kind of wonder whether anabolics don't kind of do that anyway.
You know, I mean, there is data suggesting that anabolics maybe work and I'm outside of my comfort
zone now.
So this is not don't, if somebody who actually knows stuff about these pharmaceuticals tells you
different, listen to them.
Don't listen to me.
But I think that there are differences in the receptiveness of muscles around the body to anabolic
steroids.
I think that's true.
And I think the trapezius and that area around the shoulder girl tends to be more responsive than
other parts of the body.
That's my understanding.
If that's not correct, then somebody who's an expert in that area please do correct me.
And I think that might be an explanation for why you see that kind of stuff drop off, because people
just don't need to train it when it's growing already.
I had this conversation with a strength training practitioner quite a long time ago who I respect
greatly, and they were trying to argue with me that vertical shrugs must be better than horizontal
shrugs for developing intermedius.
Because if you look at all the Olympic lifters and people do a lot of vertical shrugging motions,
they have huge traps and so forth.
And I was like, I'm not convinced that you can use today's strength athletes as an example of what
those exercises do because of that confounding effect of, you know, those pharmaceuticals.
Unless you've got an athlete that you are 100% certain is not using those substances, I'm nervous
about using them as an anecdote because I don't know what they've done.
Yeah, and you know, that's not insinuating that every single natural.
No, I'm just saying I just don't know, right?
Yeah, no, because that's a critique I hear quite often because I'll say that as well.
And then people will be like, oh, but you know, this person's natural.
You can't say that everyone's not natural and be like, OK, sure, but let's say you show me 5
naturals and let's say three of them are, two of them are, and we don't know the two that aren't.
Well, how can I use that data it?
Doesn't work.
The data is unusable.
It's not.
It's not criticizing anybody.
It's not making accusations at all.
It's literally just saying that I can't use that data for that purpose.
Yeah.
Because I don't know.
And yet this data we are describing now, pre the existence of these pharmaceuticals can be used for
that purpose because there was no possible way that it could create a problem.
I think people do get really emotion about this stuff and they want us, you know, sort of, you know,
make grand statements about who is using these things and who is not using these things.
I mean, it's simply an irrelevant question.
Yet another.
I'm just not interested because there is no way of establishing the truth with complete certainty.
So just don't bother.
You know, you've got a really nice data set pre that point.
Just go and do that.
Just go and use that.
Yeah.
So Joe Weider full body, like I said, he didn't move into some splits, which we'll cover at some
other time.
So we're going to talk a little bit about splits today.
Do you want to introduce us to where they're going to go?
Yeah.
So obviously people have heard me talk about fatigue a lot and about post workout fatigue a
reasonable amount.
And what we'd like to do today is just walk through the impact of post workout fatigue on subsequent
workouts and specifically in the context of the training splits.
So to walk through this, what I'm going to do, as I always try to do, is walk through the Physiology
of what we're actually describing the post workout fatigue effect, and then apply that to the
situations that we are interested in the training splits and go from there and talk about practical
implications and that kind of thing.
So the Physiology basically is that every time we do a strength training workout, we're going to
produce a set of post workout fatigue mechanisms.
And those post work appetite mechanisms will produce what we call fatigue, which is a temporary
reduction in exercise performance in both the trained muscles and also in non trained muscles.
That's called a nonlocal fatigue effect and I'll come on to that in more detail later on.
So when we do the workout, we perform some repetitions with a particular exercise and in the process
of doing those repetitions, we are activating loss fibers relatively high up in the kind of motor
unit sequence.
So we end up activating some fairly fast twitch muscle fibers.
As you activate those fibers, especially for longer durations of time, as tends to occur as you
approach muscular failure, because obviously each repetition, as it slows down, it lasts longer
before it's finished, you end up with an accumulation of calcium ions inside the fibers.
Now why does that happen?
It happens because every time you send an electrical signal to a muscle fiber, you need to convert
that electrical signal into a chemical signal to get the cross bridges to form.
The cross bridges are inside a fiber.
You can't send electrical signals inside a fiber.
So you have to convert the electrical signal on the outside of the fiber into a chemical signal on
the inside of the fiber that the cross bridges will understand.
And that chemical signal is calcium ions.
So you send the electrical signal from the brain, goes all the way down the spinal cord, motor
neurons into the muscle itself, and it reaches the muscle fiber, travels along the cell membranes as
it's communicating the action potentials, and then various points it goes just inside the fiber and
converts into a calcium ion signal.
But the calcium ions as they're used for the signaling inside the fiber, they build up.
And so of course, the more you're activating these fibers and the longer that process goes on for,
the more calcium ions you accumulate and the more processes can then occur that respond to the
presence of calcium ions.
This is why I talk a lot about a thing that I've named calcium ion related fatigue mechanisms or
calcium ion related fatigue.
It's just fatigue mechanisms that are derived from this process of calcium ion accumulation.
So we've got these calcium ions accumulating and they are going to then cause number of specific
fatigue mechanisms.
Now what we've got, we've got excitation contraction, coupling failure which is a little bit of
specific damage to the junction where the electrical signal converts into a chemical signal.
That junction is called the triadic junction.
We've got that process that can occur.
We've got another process, which is damage to the cell membrane that occurs through a sequence of
events that ultimately start again with that accumulation of calcium.
And then you've got actual damage to the working parts of the muscle fiber itself.
So we call that often myofibrilla damage, but it can be damaged to other bits and pieces inside the
fiber as well.
And that happens because when calcium ions accumulate inside the fiber, you get a calpain response.
Now calpain's are proteases, so they are triggered to be released in response to the presence of
accumulating calcium ions and calpain's start to digest enzymes.
They are basically and they'll digest bits of the muscle fiber internally and that is going to then
produce some damage now off the back.
Of the purpose of that being look why does that occur?
So the purpose of all fatigue mechanisms is the same.
Every single fatigue mechanism serves exactly the same purpose.
It's essentially going to stop us from running out of ATP inside the muscle fiber.
So let me just walk through this and show you how that works.
If you have a, what we call central nervous system fatigue, which is a reduction in the magnitude of
the signal the brain sends to the muscle, you're going to stop activating muscle fibers.
Now clearly straight away you can see that that's going to stop you using ATP because if you can't
switch a fiber on, you can't use ATP inside that fiber.
If you look at what calcium ion fatigue mechanisms do, whether it's excitation, congestion, coupling
failure, whether it's a damage to the cell membrane, or whether it's in fact damage to these
structures inside the fiber itself, what they are all doing is essentially stopping you from using
the ATP because they will stop the fiber from activating.
So let me walk through excitation congestion coupling fair, because this is the most obvious one.
If you damage the triadic junction, which is the link between the inside of the fiber and the
outside of the fiber, then your electrical signals which are being sent to the fiber no longer will
convert into chemical signals.
So essentially you will now stop cross bridges from happening.
Now if you stop cross bridges from happening, you've just removed a big like source of ATP usage
inside your your fiber because you're obviously the excitation contraction coupling process uses
ATP, but the primary source of ATP usage inside the fiber is the cross bridge formations.
If you stop the cross bridge formations from happening, you again stop the ATP being used.
The metabolite relativity mechanisms are another great example because all of them slow down the
rate of ATP usage by slowing down the rate of cross bridge formations.
So again, what you're doing there is you're stopping the muscle fiber from burning through the ATP
as quickly.
A lot of people think that fatigue mechanisms are related to energy usage.
They're oh, I'm running out of energy because that's how it feels.
The reality is fatigue mechanisms are stopping you doing that.
They're actually actively preventing you from churning through that ATP to avoid getting to the
point where the fiber did run out of ATP.
Because if you did get to the point where the fiber ran out of ATP, the muscle fiber would die.
We know that because if you look at the ischemia studies where they remove the supply of oxygen to a
muscle fiber and blood to a muscle fiber, then after a period of quite a long time actually, it
actually, you know, kind of goes necrotic and dies.
So these fatigue mechanisms are explicitly stopping us from creating problems.
That's they're protective.
That's what all fatigue mechanisms are for.
So if we look at these calcium, I'm relative D mechanisms, as I've said, we've got these three major
ones.
We've got this trilic junction damage, which is called excitation contraction coupling failure.
We've got damage to the cell membrane and we've got damage to the myofibrils and other bits and
pieces structurally inside the fibre.
All of that is going to happen more or less, I mean not exactly at the same time, but more or less
simultaneously.
And it's going to or at least be started more or less simultaneously, and it's going to be produced
in more or less the same kind of relative amounts.
So if you pour calcium ions into a muscle repeatedly into the muscle fibers repeatedly, because
you're doing loads and loads and loads of sets of maybe high repetitions, then what's going to
happen is you're going to get quite a lot of all three of these fatigue mechanisms.
Some people think that, you know, oh, well, this type of exercise causes a lot of excitation,
congestion, coupling failure.
Maybe that type of exercise causes more muscle damage.
No, it doesn't.
It's all just related to the same ultimate cause.
So if you have a lot of, you know, kind of muscle activation taking place for a long period of time
or high levels of muscle activation taking place for a long period of time, you're going to get
quite a lot to all three of those fatigue mechanisms.
Now, what can happen next?
Once you've started that damage process, you're going to experience that buildu of roteases inside
the muscle fibers and that's going to start causing damage.
And that damage process takes several hours, probably 4 to 6 hours of Cal pain related damage inside
the muscle fibers post workout.
After that you're going to trigger an inflammatory response which is going to come in and start
creating even more damage.
So a lot of people have probably heard me talk about how damage processes take most of your first
day post workout to actually process damage doesn't even exist immediately post workout.
You've got a several hour period of Calpanes, protease is causing damage, and then after that you've
then got a whole load of time where the inflammatory process is doing even more damage.
Now we call it damage, but the reality is it's kind of like clearing away the partially damaged
materials that the calpanes, the enzymes have produced.
So you can kind of think of it as like the enzymes going in and creating this superficial level
damage.
And then the inflammation process comes in after that and goes along and looks at the things and
goes, well, that's been damaged.
So let's remove that and it takes it away.
And of course, taking it away means that you no longer have that myofibrilla or that structure that
could produce force or transmit force.
And so you start to see reduction in strength, which is what we measure as fatigue.
So but this is called the secondary muscle damage effect where you see a period of time post
workout, several hours post workout where strength drops again.
You know, you have the drop in strength immediately post workout and then strength starts to recover
a bit and then you get a secondary drop in strength caused by this inflammatory process, which as I
say, is called the secondary muscle damage effect.
It's been observed in both animal models and also in humans.
So what's?
This whole mind for these things.
OK, doesn't often get measured in humans for the simple reason that almost with like a very tiny
number of exceptions, almost every post workout fatigue study in humans takes a measured, takes a
measurement immediately post workout and then another 124 hours or by that point that's gone.
So it's somewhere between those two time points.
I think it probably varies a little bit because I think ultimately the inflammatory process is being
responsive to the calpain induced damage.
So if you've done a workout where you've created an enormous amount of calcium and accumulation,
you're going to get a lot of calpain related damage that's going to take a long time before the
information can really to come in and do the job.
You got to think of this as like contractors working on a building project.
You know, you've got in building projects, you have like a group of contractors who'll go in and do
some work on something and until they finish their job, you can't send the next guys in to do their
bit because their bit depends on the previous stage that has to be completed.
You know, so you can kind of think about the Cal pains and the inflammation as being 2 separate
groups of contractors.
The Cal pains are doing their thing, which seems counterintuitive, but they're doing that thing.
But then the inflammation will come in and just clear away any of those damaged structures.
And that does make more sense to us because it's kind of simultaneous damage.
And you know, some people have called it repair.
It's not really repair.
It's clearing the decks, it's clearing the space so that you can replace those lost sections.
Because what we see after a workout, after damage models, you see these protein is being lost, you
see actins and myosin is being lost.
Well, they're being lost because the inflammation is pulling them out if they've been damaged by the
enzymes.
So you've got this two phase process and the inflammation is delayed and I think it probably is
delayed more if the damage is great, if that makes sense.
So I would expect that in humans doing normal strength training workouts of the kind that we
describe, 1-2, maybe three sets, something like that, you would probably find the secondary muscle
damage effect is maybe 6 to 8 hours, something like that.
Post workout.
If you've got somebody doing more of a brace pit type thing, it might even be right to the end of
that first day.
It might even be pushed into the second day, I don't know.
And would be like a graded sort of responsive.
My understanding is you see like you're raising neutrophils about four hours or so after.
Sure, absolutely.
Ultimately this is kind of where you see in in a lot of signalling stuff, in a lot of, you know,
kind of inflammatory stuff, you see a very, very sort of slow ramping up as you start to see a
trickle of this.
You don't kind of like click over six hours and suddenly it all appears.
It takes time, yeah.
And the same thing you see with signalling.
So signalling kind of ramps up.
They don't really see these kind of like instantaneous.
But I think you you know, you kind of like look for where the the peaks are, are starting to to
appear and that kind of is the zone that you you know, you kind of identify as being where most of
the activity is happening.
So I think I'm definitely removable.
I'm.
Going to put a number to it.
I know you're not super happy, just.
Coming up in your back.
Let's for hypothetical purposes, say about 8 hours or so maybe is where this inflammatory kind of
peak sort of sits in.
I think it would be later if people were doing more sets, but.
More damaging work.
Yeah.
So up until that point there will be a reduction in strength in that muscle that was trained but.
Well, this is, this is where we're then going because like that inflammatory process, so far I've
only described what it does locally.
It also has a global, as we call it, effect across the whole body because that inflammatory process
contains.
So every inflammatory process has lots of layers to it.
You start out, as you pointed out with neutrophils, you can have multiple layers of all kinds of
different things, including interleukins.
Those kind of small signaling oriented inflammatory molecules will go into the bloodstream and
they'll be detected by the brain and when the brain detects them, it'll respond by producing
feelings or sensations.
And those are what are again then going to cause supraspinal central nervous system fatigue that
affects the whole body.
So yes, what you've got is you've got a period of time post workout when you don't really have much
supraspinal central nervous system fatigue at all because whatever you had during the workout is
probably dissipated within maybe half an hour, an hour.
And then you've got a period of time when there's not really very much of that at all.
And then you know, kind of, as you say, maybe starting 6 to 8 hours after a normal strength training
workout, a sensible strength training workout, you're probably going to start to see some super
spinal CNST kicking in.
And This is why I often say to people, you've got to be a little bit careful about, if you're doing
2 workouts on the same day, splitting your full body into two halves should be a little bit careful
about where you put them.
They would be so much happier really with them on sequential days if the volumes are sufficiently
low or actually done relatively close together.
So kind of like I think you've described before where you maybe do half a workout and then go and
get some orange juice and then come back and do the other half of your workout.
I think that's a really nice strategy, you know, because you're actually slotting that in before
you've had a chance to get to that zone where that super spinal CNFT is starting to kick in.
Yeah.
So what you're saying so far is until that information point is whenever that occurs, 6 hours, 8
hours, whatever, up until that point, the muscle you chain, there's still some damage that's
occurred there.
So there'll be reduction in performance in that muscle, but other muscles that that damage hasn't
occurred in, there shouldn't be reduction in performance in those muscles.
Yeah.
So what you're going to see is that post workout you've got your excitation congestion coupling
failure.
You've got your damage to the cell membrane creating the same effect as excitation congestion
coupling failure.
You've also got a little bit of losses of calcium and sensitivity inside the muscle fiber.
And then you've got this damage to the myofibles, which is starting to increase as the cow pains do
their job over the first several hours.
And then as you said, inflammation process kicks in maybe somewhere between 4:00 and 8:00 hours and
starts to build and then you start to get damage from that as well.
The issue is that stuff like the calcium and sensitivity probably clears relatively quickly.
Damage to the cell membrane tends to repair relatively quickly.
So you've got different fatigue mechanisms moving in different directions.
So at the same time as we're creating microbial damage with Calpanes and later on with information,
you're actually getting rid of the fatigue mechanisms that you had with the damage to cell membrane
or the losses of calcium ion sensitivity.
Now this is what makes post workout fatigue relatively difficult, relatively difficult job to get a
handle on if you want to do it mechanism by mechanism.
And that's why I found it useful to describe calcium iolated fatigue as a group of mechanisms
because when you put them together as a group, you can see what they're all doing because they're
actually all doing the same thing, which is reducing single fiber mechanical tension.
And when you understand that that is a problem for hypertrophy and that they're all doing the same
thing, you can just go on a group level.
Generally speaking, what you see is a a bit of a recovery over the first four to six, 4 to 8 hours,
and then a secondary drop in strength because of the secondary muscle damage effect.
Because the inflammation really clears away a load of slightly damaged biofedrals, which were
previously producing force but now aren't doing anything because they're gone.
And then you can sort of see the shape of things.
But trying to go, well, you know, what's this mechanism doing and how does that then change?
And you're going to end up with things moving in different directions.
It's very, very hard to get a clear picture, but when you group them together and you can see that
you've got this initial slow recovery and then you've got this kind of secondary drop in strength
when the extra myofibular damage happens due to the inflammation that as a whole then starts to sit
relatively well together.
But just to repeat one thing I mentioned earlier, I just want to say it again.
The issue here is that all of these mechanisms are going to respond similarly to a specific workout.
So if you look at the way that the information responds to the post workout kind of Cal pain damage,
it's going to be proportional like I was explaining.
So delayed as in the more damage you create, the more it'll be delayed but bigger.
So if you create a lot of calping related damage because you've created a lot of calcium
accumulation, you're going to have a big inflammation effect, you're going to have, you know, a
bigger secondary muscle damage effect and you're going to have a bigger super spinal centre and
nervous system fatigue effect.
And This is why I often say to people that post workout fatigue mechanisms are a package deal.
So if you create a large amount of post workout fatigue, then that is created by a large amount of
all mechanisms.
There is no scenario in which these are going to like.
There's no pick and choose.
It's like.
I'm trained to get less of 1 and more of another.
It's the packet because they ultimately all come from that calcium and accumulation.
Even the inflammation comes secondarily from that, the calcium and accumulation, because it's
responding to the damage created by the proteases, which is responding to the calcium and
accumulation.
So it's absolutely all tied together.
So if you do a workout that has a large damaging effect on a local level, you are going to
automatically create a large effect at the supraspinal fatigue level as well.
That's kind of really, really important for where we're going next when we start to talk about the
practical side of things.
So let me just insert 2 minutes on the eye on what supraspinal Centrino system fatigue is, because I
often get this question and I keep answering it and I guess people maybe haven't listened to some of
the older stuff.
So every time we produce a maximum effort muscular contraction, we are limited.
We can't produce any more motive recruitment than our maximum tolerable protection of effort.
So Marcora's psycho biological model of fatigue says that every time we produce a central motor
command, which is designed to create recruitment, obviously the magnitude of that central motor
command relates to the magnitude of the recruitment.
The bigger the central motor ground, the more the recruitment, the higher the level of motive
recruitment you can achieve.
The maximum level of recruitment you can obtain is limited because every time you create that
central mode command, it copies itself to the other parts of the brain which sense things, and it
copies itself as a perception of effort.
So when you reach your maximum tolerable potential effort, in other words, when you reach the
sensation of effort that you cannot go past because it is too discomforting, too painful, then you
will stop producing central mode command because if you did produce any more, it would go past your
maximum limit, which by definition is impossible.
Now that essentially gives us a feedback loop whereby the the central mode command in an if we have
no other sensations going on, the central mode command determines is determined, sorry, by the
maximum perception of effort associated only with that central mode command.
If you start to feel other sensations during exercise, if you have pain or some kind of discomfort,
a common example during exercise will be the heart and lungs producing cardiovascular sensations.
Those sensations also add to your effort perceptions and they start to bring you closer to your
maximum tolerable perception effort, but they're not adding central motor command.
So if you have a lot of sensations during exercise that are discomforting or painful, then what's
going to happen is you are going to reach your maximum tolerable perception effort at a lower level
of central motor command.
And that means that you have a deficit of activation, what we call a supraspinal central nervous
system physique effect.
We call it supraspinal because it's above the level of the spine.
It's actually happening inside the brain.
Now what we're describing here is inflammation leaving the muscle, going into the bloodstream,
circulating, being detected by the brain or across the blood, brain barrier, circumventricular
organs and producing A sensation which then does exactly the same thing as the sensations that we
experience during exercise, which then create a reduction in the central motor command, which then
produces this supraspinal central nervous fatigue effect.
So it's a global effect.
So you can literally do they create super spinal CSP from doing an exercise with the quads and it'll
show up when you then try and do an exercise with another part of the body like the hamstrings or
the glutes or the delts or whatever you want to do.
It doesn't matter.
It's going to be affected by the same fundamental problem.
Is all of that making sense?
And there's studies where they'll do like, certainly, you know, maybe one leg will do a set of leg
extensions to failure and then they'll admit they'll the other leg will do nothing.
And then two days later they'll do, you know, voluntary activation assessment in the leg that didn't
train and there was a, there's a deficit due to super spinal C&S fatigue.
Do they have studies where they've checked entirely undulated muscles?
Post workout not sure.
Definitely during workouts you can get those studies.
There's studies done across upper and lower body.
There's studies done quads and hamstrings I think.
I'm struggling to remember if there is a post workout non local fatigue study.
There aren't actually that many non local fatigue studies out there.
There's maybe 5 or 6.
I think normally instead of using the non local fatigue like just testing a different muscle
entirely, what they normally do is test voluntary activation.
So they do a interpolated twitch test and they look at the level of recruitment that you can achieve
in a muscle relative to the maximum level that you could achieve if it was electrically stimulated.
And they're pretty, pretty good indications of CNSP.
They don't allow you to differentiate between superspinal and spinal.
But given that we've got a mechanism that we understand and it's relatively well described,
extremely well described in animal models, you know, I think it's relatively, I can be relatively
confident that it's the same thing we're talking about.
But yeah, so basically we end up with this reduction in the level of recruitment that we can achieve
in any muscle of the body as a result of that muscle damage that we've experienced, you know, in
that muscle that we've just trained and it's going to kick in like we were saying around about sort
of the 8 hour mark.
Maybe if it's more damaging, I would expect it to happen later.
The thing is, the reason I'm cagey about this is because in a lot of animal models, they create
insane amounts of damage.
You know, they do electrically stimulated eccentric contractions and they just pile the volume on
and you can see like delays for days after those kind of situations.
It's just, and like, I'm a big fan of animal studies.
I think they tell us an enormous amount about how Physiology works.
But at the same time, I also know you have to do corrections when they're doing different things
that have effects.
So if you know which we do that the more damage you create, the more delayed the damage effects are.
Then you do like a mouse study and you see actin and myosin being lost four days post workout.
And you look at it, it's because they've done like, you know, 150 maximally electrically stimulated
contractions at some silly velocity.
You know, it's like, that's just that's just that's just telling you what the extent of the damage
is.
It's extreme now absolutely off the top end of anything that you would ever see in a human being
ever.
But you know that that's what's happening and that's why you're seeing this extreme delay.
You know, you look at human studies or more sensible animal studies and they generally will have
that that delay being much shorter and the damages done and over with within the 1st 24 hours.
You know, some people got no, I think the wrong end of the stick when they're looking at delayed
damage and they've looked at some of the animal studies and oh wow, you know, damage is delayed for
4872 hours.
I can never, never train, you know, this close together.
I can never do a workout this close to another workout.
And someone know you're, you've got to understand that if you just produce a small amount of damage
because you've only done 1-2 or three sets or whatever, then you're not going to be in the zone
where you're going to have that problem.
You know, some to our data, you know, the bird study shows that myopsys back down a baseline after a
single set, after just like 3235 hours, 36 hours, something like that.
So there's absolutely no way there's muscle damage repair happening at that point.
If you've got no myopia rate elevation, you haven't got any damage repair happening.
You know, it's done.
So I think that's a really nice illustration of how no damage just goes on.
The process is really, really extended.
If you start to, you know, create more of it, the problem is is delayed and it tends to take a
longer time to to be fixed.
So that's kind of where we are with these fatigue mechanisms.
So let's now start to relate this to training splits.
And you know, we've already mentioned a few things about this, but basically, you know, if you're
doing.
I like the program we've looked at today, you know, three times a week, single sets, you know, and
arguably there's a bit of two sets there because some of the exercises were a little bit kind of
similar.
But you know, let's say we're dealing with something like single sets.
Then, you know, basically you're going to have your fatigue processes are going to happen and
they're going to be washed out probably by, you know, the sort of 36 hour point.
I would say in most cases by two sets, you might be pushing that up to 48 hours and three sets.
You might get a little bit of a drift over like we talked about I think in the last podcast.
But ultimately more or less going to be, you know, kind of done for the next workout because we're
doing full body.
We don't have anything happening in that interim period of time.
So we've done full body workout.
We have a day of rest, we go back and do another workout, you know, and OK, if we've done three
sets, we might have a little bit just tailing off the edge.
But the supraspinal CNS fatigue, you know, as I say, it's going to be linked to the damage.
So it's all just going to be affecting us equally because we're doing full body workouts, training
exactly the same thing all the time.
If you start to do split routines where you're training on sequential days and you're going maybe up
a lower or you're doing a more complex split, but you're fundamentally training different muscles on
different days.
What's going to happen is you are going to arrive back in the gym the following day and you are
going to be in full on superspinal CST state from that previous day.
And the more you split your workouts up and the more volume you do for those specific muscles, the
more of a problem you're going to have.
So if you're doing 5 sets, you know, because you're maybe doing Max, like the Max you can really do
with full body is three sets workout or TA tires.
You do 5 sets for upper lower which is kind of the Max you can really do with twice a week then the
same.
Mask is.
That's basically.
That's the recovery, yeah.
I mean, you know, obviously technically you could do whatever you want.
There's no, there's no laws about you know how many sets you can.
And also you are talking about moderate loads.
Yeah.
So, yeah.
So if somebody's doing heavier loads, contract positions, leaving reps in reserve, you can change
these numbers, but we don't have good data for what that looks like.
You know, I'm talking about people doing moderate, moderately heavy loads of normal training,
training exercises and training to failure really.
Now in those scenarios, three sets probably about Max you can do for for body three times a week or
3 1/2 times a week.
People could and probably do do four or five sets for sort of the upper lower splits and they're
going to be technically recovering for the next workout because on the timeline of judging upper to
upper and lower to lower recovery is going to happen.
But you are reducing the level of recruitment that you can achieve in the workout that you do on the
second day of that sequence.
So if you're doing upper, lower Monday, Tuesday, you come back in on Tuesday, you are going to find
that your level of recruitment is not as high as it would be if you hadn't done that workout the
previous day.
And that's literally because of this superspinal seen CNS fatigue mechanism that we've been
describing.
Now a lot of people will say, well, yeah, I can feel that.
But yeah, that's the point is first to be able to, you know, it's like that's that's what CNS
fatigue is.
It's a creation of a feeling in the brain, which means that as you approach your maximum level of
effort, you can't get to the maximum level of recruitment for that maximum level of effort.
Which is another a great point to address, which is that some people go, oh, well, I'll just try
harder.
I'm like, no, you're already trying as hard as you can.
That's the point.
The point is that even at maximum level of effort, you are now feeling like you've hit your maximum
level of effort, but that's not now corresponding to the same level of motor unit recruitment
because you already had effort perception from something else.
So yes, you are absolutely giving it your best effort and you're producing a maximum possible level
of effort.
You can, I believe you.
That's not the question.
The question is that the level of effort that you're producing is now associated with a lower level
of recruitment because you've got efforts sort of already banked from other things that are going on
inside the body.
So no matter what the Super spinal CNF fatigue is taking up some effort or it's it's creating a
perception of effort.
And sure, someone could say, well, what if I'm really motivated and therefore I can actually
tolerate more effort?
It's like, yeah, OK, that's great, but.
You could have been motivated and not suffering from CNS fatigue and you'd be even better off.
Yeah, there isn't a way of fixing it so that you come out at the same place, always get whatever
strategy you come up with to try and increase recruitment.
You're always going to be worse off than you would be if you didn't have the CNS fatigue in place.
If you compare like for like, because what you'd have to do is you'd have to say, well, I'm
comparing me having CNS fatigue but being motivated with me not having CNS fatigue but not being
motivated.
How does that work?
You're basically comparing something that's completely unfair, which is to be, you know, honest what
a lot of people do on the Internet all the time.
But the point is that you can't find a scenario in which this is going to be fixable in the sense
that you can completely get back to a state that it is as if it wasn't there.
Because because you can't, it just isn't isn't doable.
So you've mentioned if you're doing say single sets, it may not be as much of a problem than if you
were doing multiple sets, right?
So you say you did a single set, 24 hours later you're training again.
Most of that damage is probably repaired come that's that point if you're doing heavier loads.
Now this is the issue.
If we're looking at splits, you know, we obviously know based on the maintenance studies that it
probably takes four sets or more if you're training once a week to actually produce it and net
hypertrophy outcome.
So the broader that split is that naturally means you're going to be training with a lower frequency
per muscle.
So if you've got full body, obviously every time you're training that each muscle is getting trained
3 * a week.
Obviously, it's a high frequency.
If you've got upper lower, you're doing 4 sessions.
And obviously because you're splitting it across 2 sessions or two different workouts, we now have a
default lower frequency per muscle.
Now suddenly you go to push, pull legs, then we're further dividing or dividing up that volume
across fewer days or more days, but fewer frequency per muscle.
So each time we take one step further out, we need to have more per muscle volume within that single
session.
So you suddenly have a five day split or a six day split or whatever that might be, some kind of dry
split and that muscle is getting trained once per week.
You're now probably training that muscle with five, six sets and you know, training in another
muscle the next day and you've just done six sets, sets worth of muscle damage the day prior.
That's going to have a bigger impact on superspinal C&S fatigue.
Yeah, absolutely.
Yeah, the really annoying thing about the way that volume works, and this is this is something that
people keep asking me about and it's like, well, this is just how muscles seem to work, is that the
more damage you create in one event, the longer the process is to fix all of that.
And this is kind of reflected in that delay that I was describing.
So I think, you know, some people have kind of taken the view that or made the assumption that more
damage just means more damaged fibers, which is not really what's going on.
You're actually damaging the fibers to a greater extent individually and that then takes more time.
And it is because in part because when you create that greater amount of calcium and accumulation,
which creates the greater calpine response, that then requires more time to go through its process.
It's like you're telling the fiber to go through a process that is fundamentally longer and then the
inflammation process again is then longer.
So ultimately you do 5 sets or something for a particular muscle group, you're creating damage which
is going to take a long time to then fix and it's just going to sit there until it goes through the
process.
You are then basically creating a superspinal CNST problem that's going to take at least all of the
following day, if not the day after that as well to deal with.
And you're then going to be, you know, kind of suffering from that effect when you do your workouts
that involve other parts of the body because superspinal CNS fatigue is literally just happening
inside the brain.
So let's say somebody doesn't want to train full body, that I want to do full body three times a
week or whatever.
What are some ways that they could minimize the impact of superspinal CNS fatigue on successive or
future workouts?
So first of all, let me clarify that there's not very much that you can do once you've triggered
post workout fatigue to do anything to alleviate it.
That statement is almost 100% true.
There's a little bit that you can do to mess around with it, but ultimately it's far better to work
on prevention rather than trying to fix the problem once it's happened.
So First things first is adjust the training program rather than trust in, you know, magic widgets
to reduce the magnitude of the post workout fatigue effect because it's not and there's not really
very much that's going to happen.
There's a little bit of data here and there that suggests that if somebody is not eating sufficient
protein that they increase protein levels that will accelerate the rate of post workout fatigue
recovery.
Yeah, not very much else.
There's a couple of tiny little things here and there, but maybe I'll do FAQ about that.
So ultimately we're talking about structuring the workout to try and avoid the problem.
And really First things first would be everything that we know that affects post workout fatigue,
which is essentially you're going to start with your volume, which we've already talked about South
volumes can't be top end.
Now, just pausing a moment.
This is really important because a lot of the way that the, you know, people who advocate for two
times a week being, you know, as good as or you know, some case people play, it's even better than
which is crazy.
But you know, my 2 times program is just as good as your three times a week program.
I'm like, well, hang on a minute because you know, if you're wanting to put these two programs
together and I'm now explaining that you can't go up to those high volumes in order to be kind of
competitive.
And straight away, we're starting to make 2 * a week look even less attractive than it previously
was.
Ultimately, you can't get to a maximum level of hypertrophy if you're constantly in a state of
superspinal CSD.
We did a podcast about this didn't we, where we talked about how I hope I remember this correctly.
I'm very embarrassed if we haven't done a podcast about this.
I'm sure we've done a podcast about what training variables affect our maximum possible hypertrophy.
Am I dreaming?
We may have maximum hypertrophy.
Was it when we were talking about the full body up lower split doing?
I think we talked about how certain things would affect the maximum possible hypertrophy you could
achieve and other things would simply affect the rate of hypertrophy.
Yes, yes, yes, we did do that.
We did a later podcast.
I forget what the topic we did do.
Podcast by there I will.
Lead to the same outcome.
That's right.
Yeah.
I really enjoyed that podcast.
I thought was a great, a great narrative to walk through yes.
So, so yeah.
So we're talking about two times becoming even less attractive because now with, with constant high
volume 2 * a week training.
So you're doing 5 sets twice a week.
You you never training the top motor units ever can't.
So you can't get those those last few pounds of muscle mass because you can't access the fibers.
So it creates that problem that might only really be recognizable in advanced people pushing the
boundaries, but you know, got volume as being a key factor.
Obviously got stuff like Rep range, you know, you just can't start talking about doing, you know,
anything higher than 10 reps really, if you're wanting to to do sort of those workouts where you're
doing back-to-back, you know, training to failure is probably not a great idea either.
You probably because the way that calcium and accumulation works, it's quite non linear and it tends
to sort of go exponential in the last two reps of a moderate load set.
So you'd probably want to be starting to dial back the reps and reserve.
This is just really like dialing back volume in in effect because you're taking away stimulating
reps.
So again, you then look at the program, you go, well, if I want to train 2 * a week, I've kind of
got to do fewer sets and I've got to leave a Rep in reserve here and there or maybe even 2.
And now it's starting to look very much like you're just doing the same volume as a full body but.
Like 2 * a week in terms of Apollo Apollo or push pulls.
Yeah, yeah, exactly.
So it doesn't really matter whether you're doing them as a six day a week program or a four day week
program, you're still hitting the same problem in the sense that you're having back-to-back gym days
and therefore you're going to have that superspinal CNS Teague effect occurring.
And so you've got to look at the post workout fatigue variables and go, you know, I've got to look
at my volume, I've got to look at my proximity to failure, I've got to look at my Rep range and then
from a stretch position because stretch produces more calcium and accumulation.
You then would look at your eccentric phases and you've got to look at your resistance profiles.
We may not have much choice over that because your eccentric might be determined by the equipment
that you're using more or less as long as you're not already being silly with it.
And you stretch position, you might be needing to do those exercises because either those are the
ones that are available to you or because you want to train certain muscles according to neuro
mechanical matching.
Really, you kind of limited with your volume Rep range, which hopefully nobody's doing silly high
reps anyway, but you're limited by your, your volume and your, your approximate to failure.
But the point I'm making is that if you go after those two things, volume and approximate to
failure, you go, OK, fine, I'll do kind of a bit less volume and I'll, I'll lose some reps in
reserve.
You're going to end up doing, you know, pretty much the same the first stimulating reps as you do in
a, you know, three times a week program, except you're only doing it twice a week.
Well, how's that going to work?
I mean.
Which is why we did that podcast talking about splitting a full body into up low.
And one thing we did talk about was doing that on the same day.
But then we also talked about up, lower up, lower up, lower 6 * a week where each session had lower
volume than if you were to do it over 4 days.
If you take your, your full body three times a week amount of volume and put it over six days, then
we're talking each muscle getting, you know, one set worth or whatever each one of those sessions.
Absolutely.
I mean, when we talked about that, which is one of the most quoted episodes, I, I keep sharing that
episode when we talked about Clancy Ross and his program and then we talked about this idea of
splitting a full body into 6 upper lower days.
Basically, you've got the decision to make is do I do everything in one day where I don't have a
superspinal sanity problem the following day?
But I do have quite a superspinal sanity problem at the end of my workout because I'm absolutely
cooked.
So I just don't want to do anything by the time I get the end of the workout because of all those
sensations associated with exercise, which is the same thing.
It's just they're caused by different originators.
It's not caused by the damage and the inflammation.
It's caused by things like the sort of activities of the cardiovascular system and the subsequent
information from and that.
But if you split the workout out, then you've got the following day you've got suprospinal fee
effect, but you've got suprospinal, suprospinal synthetic effect from the exercise itself on the if
you do it more in one go.
So you've got the same problem caused by slightly different things.
Now, you know, coming back to your solution, which is to, you know, or one solution that you've
described, which is to do half the workout, you know, go and have a small break for food and drink
and then come back and do the other half.
Very Hepburn really, you know, but that's, that would probably be the perfect scenario because it
would basically mean that you wouldn't be falling into either of those two issues.
Of course, we're now describing someone who's basically a professional fitness influence.
Yeah, it's, it's not necessarily going to fit with everyone.
Schedules it to go.
No.
So what you've given an outline of there is the things that you can do, you can modify to
essentially reduce the the effect of the calcium on related fatigue, right.
So these are variables within a training.
Exactly.
Exactly.
Now on the other end of that training session, so ultimately you said there's not a lot that can be
done kind of you just need to give it the time that it needs.
And so that means that any, and we've, you know, said this multiple times, any workout split, any
training split that has successive days is going to suffer some problem there.
So obviously the natural solution would be something like a full body with a day off in between each
session.
But you could even, and I've been, I've actually been thinking about programming this in one of my
groups.
If you were going to do something like a upper lower, it might even be and this becomes a scheduling
problem for some people and that's why I haven't done it yet.
But you could even do like a upper day off, lower day off, upper day off, lower dev instead of doing
2 back-to-back sessions.
And that would give you, if you alternated like that, well, each every four days you're repeating a
session.
So that would look in theory similar to a full body AB if you were doing an AB full body where
nothing was being repeated over either those two sessions.
So if someone had a long enough exercise list that they simply weren't able to repeat, or do you
know half of that work out in each successor session, that could be a viable option for them.
Yeah, that's that is literally the slowest that you can go.
Yeah, if you're doing single sets.
If you're doing single sets but in that.
Single sets in that scenario you need to that is as slow as you could possibly go.
Doesn't mean it's bad because you're still making progress, but you know it would be the slowest
that you could possibly go.
Doing 2 sets would probably be my choice in that scenario, but again.
Yeah, which I don't think if someone's going to split into an upper lower, then normally not going
to be doing single set per muscle because that session's going to be 20 minutes, Yeah.
I mean, so you know, again, but we're talking about pretty slow rates of progress in that scenario.
The the, the full body ABI think is, is interesting because you do get a decent chunk of overlap
which you're not getting with.
But as you said, that was the advantage of that.
So you kind of you get the speed of the kind of every other day programs, which is which is pretty
fast for most of the muscle.
And then you get the speed of, you know, kind of the the every four days for the bits that aren't
shared, which I think is a nice compromise.
I think upper lower every other day is starting to go really, really slowly, I think.
But you know, with single sets.
Yeah, again with single sets, yeah, that probably wouldn't be had.
It has someone to do it the way I try to get around with upper lower or push pull or something like
that where the successive days is.
I find, you know, we, we talked about this last week where I think it was last week.
I'd mentioned to you, we used to say that full body was the hardest split to program for.
And you made the comment that once you started using AB, it became so easy.
And for me, I never find up a lower or a two way split the hardest to program for because you end up
being so limited in there's only like a few scenarios that kind of work fairly well.
And one of them, like you've talked about in terms of reducing volume or stimulating volume or
fatigue, you end up kind of getting locked into.
Well, I get locked into lower repetitions.
Like often I'll do multiple sets of very low repetitions, sub five repetitions or, you know,
obviously all you're limited this with the amount of volume in total, the types of exercises you can
do.
And it ends up being almost like these are the options I've got.
I've got these very small handful of options to make this work well.
Whereas I look at something like full body and it's like, well, if I want to do high repetitions, it
doesn't matter.
You want to do a single set of higher reps, who cares?
Or, you know, there's so many things you can do, it becomes so liberating that everything is on the
table.
But with upper lower to do it.
Well, this is just not not that many options, is there?
I guess I did spend a lot of time trying to program like that.
So I don't, I don't really know.
I think I think really for me, it's been it's been a very interesting process to look at the
routines that you've been sharing with us.
Because I think that has, you know, shown how many people were simply just doing full body same
workout three times a week and how popular that was and how common that was that it's kind of
shifted my.
Sort of baseline on my benchmarking, that now has become my new kind of starting point.
It's like whenever I look at the program, I'm like, if I were to just do 8 or 10 exercises three
times a week, 1 set each, two sets each, maybe if I was feeling really energetic or for some of
them, would this new program that I'm being shown be better than that?
And you know, sort of nine times out of 10, it's not.
And then if I look at a program, you know, that I'm looking at for somebody more advanced and
they're looking at bigger exercise selection and they're really looking at gaining muscle mass quite
slowly over a long period of time.
And I go, you know, if I were doing full body AB alternating, you know, and that's my huge selection
of exercises.
They can do 20 exercises and each time maybe more, you know, is anything that I could possibly throw
at them be, could anything be possibly better than that?
And again, 9 times out of 10, there isn't anything you know, And it's like I had, I was saying this
to you the other day.
So much of the programming that I've seen in my time over the last 1520 years of looking at this
stuff, so much complexity is just complexity for the purposes of looking good.
And it doesn't do anything.
It doesn't do anything.
In fact, 9 times out of 10, it makes the program worse.
And I said to you the other day that I thought one of your programs or a couple of your programs
were actually introducing complexity that was interesting, that works, that actually added value.
And it was such a shock for me to see it because I was like, every time I see complexity in a
program, it's, it's not adding anything.
It's, it's, it's not working.
It's, it's not better than a program that was written by somebody in 19401950.
You know, that's just a bunch of exercises done three times a week for a single set or two sets or
maybe three sets.
It's really difficult to add complexity to a program and have it add value.
I think, you know, the, the baseline, the benchmark, this is horrifying actually, when you think
about it, that the baseline level of programming that was reached in kind of the early, which maybe
is as good as we can do now.
Really the only thing that you could point out and go this makes bodybuilding better is the
availability of machines.
Yeah, it's exercise selection, that's all.
The only thing that should differ, yeah.
Because ultimately they're using full body training three times a week.
They're using relatively heavy loads, heavy or moderately heavy loads, probably not training to
failure on every single set, giving themselves some space here and there.
But I wouldn't point to that as being an enormous factor.
They're doing everything you could possibly think of that that would make a training program work
really, really well to point to a feature of a training program today and go, oh, well, but we're
doing this, that's better.
And they weren't doing that.
The only thing I can do is point to excise selection.
That's all I can do because everything else is already there.
It's just horrifying.
It's like, how or have we been wasting our time?
Or is it just that?
Is it just there's no where else to go?
I mean, arguably you could say, well, you know the kind of the, the 3 1/2 times week guys who want
to train every other day.
They've kind of yeah, OK, fine.
I'll give you that.
People are training 3 1/2 * a week rather than three times a week.
Yes, they've managed to find a a tiny little bit of a.
They said back then anyway.
Hoffman back in 40s.
People have actually said that, you know, and you have to kind of say, well, would societal
pressures have stopped you from doing that pre?
Yeah.
Literally, Bob Hoffman says.
The problem with this is you have to train on a Sunday.
That was it.
So I don't think we can even claim that as in you, but.
That would be the only thing I could think of really.
It's very, very interesting, you know, And you know, perhaps there's an entire conversation there
around why that is and why we haven't managed to make progress.
And is it, is it just because there isn't any progress to be made?
Could be.
Well, it's not, it's not even just not making progress, is it?
Like, we have actually generally gone further away from what seems to make sense physiologically.
And you know, I was reflecting on this, I don't know if I said it to you or not, but only about a
year ago, maybe two years ago, I felt I couldn't give clients an A, A or a a a format.
Well, that's The thing is because we've actually changed the industry.
So it's going to be really, really interesting to watch the trickle down effect as because you know,
pre my kind of model, you know, we had most of the scientific kind of part of the, of the of the
Internet relating to the fitness industry was just kind of going along with the metabolic stress,
muscle damage kind of ideas, which essentially just supported the way that, you know, kind of post
panabolic era bodybuilders wanted to train.
You know, that was just saying like, yeah, you know, smash the muscle to beers and that's create
loads and loads of stress inside the muscle and all this metabolite accumulation train with high
reps and short rests and all this kind of stuff.
And so it was just mirroring that and it wasn't really trying to connect Physiology with what you
know, was going on.
And now we've bracketed that.
We've said, OK, Physiology says this, look, that's exactly how pre steroid era bodybuilders used to
train.
And that's a really solid narrative.
You know, especially at the same time as the kind of scientific assessments of things like metabolic
stress and muscle damage being drivers of hypertrophy are completely fallen over or they've been
actively destroyed actually.
And to be fair to some of the researchers who've done the work on that and you know, they've gone
after those hypothesis quite aggressively and shown them to be invalid.
So at the same time as that edifice is falling down, we're showing people that, you know, look,
that's why people trained.
That's our greatest source of analytical evidence here is what Physiology tells us should also with
the case it matches perfectly.
I think that is going to be a tremendously powerful story for people to the resonates people.
And I think it'd be fascinating to watch over the next few years as it trickles down.
And as I keep saying to people on social media when they say, yeah, but aren't you worried about
these people criticizing it?
And I'm like, no, I'm not worried because you don't replace beliefs with criticisms, you replace
them with new beliefs.
So until somebody comes along with a better model, a better explanation, a better belief system than
I'm presenting you with, I'm not going to worry because the stimulating reps model is going to win,
has already won, really.
You know, maybe somebody will pop up tomorrow with a better one.
Fantastic.
I'll be the first in line to congratulate them.
But, you know, until that happens, criticisms don't matter.
So I think it's been fascinating to watch trickle down effect and watch how that starts to change
the way people are training.
As you say, you and many other people will be able to recommend programs that are full body and
people will be like, yeah, no, that makes sense.
Yeah, I mean, even full body itself, like that's another thing that only a few years ago the
majority of the industry would say, well, no, that's that's for beginners.
You don't do that as an advanced lifter.
And now that's OK.
You know, the narrative is shifting and and we've seen that narrative shift with the A a or
repeating workouts.
I used to have to fool people like I would, I would write ABC workouts.
I mean, how many times do we talk about this?
You know, we've been on a call be like, you know, what do you think of this workout?
I'll swap a barbell for a dumbbell so I can get them doing the same thing, but they don't realize it
or, you know, try to get a machine.
I.
Remember those conversations?
Yeah, and now I don't now.
Now what happens is people contact me and be like, why did you program ABC?
I remember that.
I remember seeing those questions and you're like, well, yeah, that's not really.
These are people just cognitively shifted now.
And.
It makes me think to go back to what we've been talking about the upper lower.
A lot of the, a lot of the way upper lower is being programmed, it is still ABCD.
Yeah, A/B, A/B, I mean, no, what you mean they're doing different work?
Yeah, they're.
Doing different workouts on each on each days.
They might do a squat on one of the days and they might do a knee extension on the other of the
days.
And so they're only training Rep from once a week and so unless they're doing 5 sets, they're not
going to see any growth there.
So you've got the problem there that you've just said, but you're getting the worst of all worlds
because you're still causing this super super.
Spare because I I kind of I kind of got I got people getting very irate with me because I said that
upper lower is the is the is the trying to remember what I actually said.
People have accused me of saying it's the worst possible training split and it's not.
It's just it doesn't do.
Anything well.
Different is, I think it was what I was saying.
It doesn't do it.
It doesn't solve a problem.
That's something that's what I was saying.
It doesn't solve a problem workouts have.
So if you like, look at a, you know, kind of a training split that you you, you like and you know
what, what problem might it have?
And does you know this other training split solve that problem or you can't really say that upper
lower split really solves any problem, especially if you do it with different exercises on different
days, because you end up basically doing kind of once a week training programming.
And I can't remember what else I was saying about it, but that I remember that was the that was the
vibe I was going for.
It was it doesn't solve any particular problem.
That was the context of me saying that I'm not saying that it's worse than bro split, I'm saying
that it doesn't solve any particular problem.
Which I think is an interesting perspective or framework for people to use if you think about and
you know, we're not, I mean, I'm not, I don't know if you are, but I'm not saying everyone should be
using a full body program.
I mean, I know you're not saying everyone must do anything either, but.
You know, I don't use modal verbs exactly.
I don't place obligations on anybody.
But if you start by assessing a split against a full body program, you can at least see is it
superior or is it inferior.
And you've got two options there for full body.
You can do a, a, A or you can do AB repeating.
And those will cover basically all needs in terms of how many exercises 1 needs to do, etcetera.
And then you can take your upper lower ABCD or up lower ABAB or push, pull or also limbs, whatever
splits it out there.
And you can weigh it up against full body A, a, A or full body AB and see is it solving anything?
Is it doing anything better?
And I, I would hazard a guess that they're probably all going to come up inferior in terms of what
they offer.
And then of course, you're going to have people popping up saying, but I like training like this and
what I like is important.
I'm like sure.
But again, they're separate questions.
So understand that you are, you know, kind of sacrificing some, you know, kind of rate of gains
because you want to train a certain way.
And that is a totally acceptable decision to make.
And, you know, nobody can tell you not to do that.
Oh, I shouldn't really.
I mean, I'm using modal verbs.
It's it's like you change everyone, but what you can't really claim is that your choice, your
preferences are going to make one program automatically, you know, equal to another program that
fundamentally physiologically is better.
You know, that just isn't, isn't, isn't something we can really countenance.
It's just not valid.
And to be honest, I kind of find it a confusing argument.
Even beyond that, if someone says to me I don't like full body, I think I mentioned this last week,
my first challenge to them is we'll give it a go and see.
What you actually absolutely.
Might start getting results are gonna like it.
But even if you didn't, even if someone set up that I don't like training too many leg sessions with
my upper body or whatever, Okay, well, this is where AB can work really well because you can wait
one of those sessions, more upper body and one less lower body, etc.
So you've got so much flexibility in a full body AB that I fail to see that anyone could, could not
program that in a way that they did in fact enjoy.
Yeah, absolutely.
I mean, when people say to me they don't want to train legs three days a week, I'm like, well, there
are ways of training legs that aren't as, you know, kind of uncomfortable as probably what you're
doing, you know.
You know, there's, I think I'm, I'm absolutely sold on, on single leg leg pressing.
I think it's absolutely fantastic.
You know, I think it's one of those kind of exercises that you can put in a program and it doesn't
feel like you've, you know, crushed yourself.
You know, I think if somebody's like, well, I feel like I have to squat every time I do leg day, I'm
like, well, why don't you alternate squats with single leg leg presses?
You might find that it starts to work for you because you're not now suffering in the way that you
suffer when you squat, as an example.
Or if you if you really wanted, you could do quads on one of them and you could do hands on the
other like you could.
You want to take it a step further?
You mean then losing a little bit in?
Terms but if someone who's so against it, then they didn't want.
To they're so against it, but you know, there's, there's, there's ways of, of, of kind of, as I say,
you know, if, if, if you've kind of locked yourself into the mentality where you feel like you have
to squat every time you do leg day, then maybe reassess that, you know, because there are ways of
training legs.
There are not necessarily quite so painful.
Yeah, yeah.
Is there any other split worth mentioning?
I mean, ultimately what we've arrived at is every split that has successive sessions or or days on,
on consecutive days is going to suffer from this problem and I think.
That's the message really.
Yeah, I think that's the message.
So any, any, any, any program that you're doing where you're in the gym back-to-back two days in a
row, you need to look at the program and go, what's the impact of that previous day session on what
I'm doing today?
And even if you're training a completely different set of body parts, doesn't matter If you did a
couple of sets for a muscle, you're probably going to have a problem the following day.
That's really the issue.
If you did a single set borderline, but if you did multiple sets for a muscle group, you could
probably got a problem.
And if you're training with a split that is doing different muscles on different days, you're almost
certainly doing more than a set per muscle.
Really.
Otherwise, what are you even doing?
I mean.
OK, well, hopefully that'll help you guys understand super spinal CNS fatigue and at least how to
evaluate a split, you know, take a look at, compare it to full body and see is it doing something
better?
Is it doing something worse?
What's going to work best for you?
So we hope you guys join us again next week and thank you as always for listening and subscribing
and commenting and all the good stuff.