Episode: 011 Why the idea that a single exercise can train the whole muscle and “bias” a region is false
URL: https://open.spotify.com/episode/4AEGotzIHIXSPQDCWkXRCK
Published: 2025-08-04
================================================================================

Hello, everyone, Welcome back to another episode of Hypertrophy past and Present.
Thank you everyone for subscribing and listening, commenting, asking us questions.
I mentioned last week that we, both Chris and I do Q and As every week and we're always interested
in feedback and questions and even potential topics that you guys are finding can maybe a little bit
confusing at this point or you want us to cover so.
And I did actually have some really interesting feedback from people over the last week as well.
So thank you guys for doing that.
Chris, how are you today?
I'm doing well.
Thank you, Jake.
Yeah, yeah.
Not too bad at all settling in.
Everything is going well.
Awesome.
So we have a big episode planned today.
There's he starts to cover.
So I'm not gonna waste any time.
I'm gonna jump straight into the plan I want to talk about and then we're gonna cover a very
important topic, I would say.
Now this is, I know I say this every week and I always say, oh, it's a unique plan.
It's a different plan.
This is actually quite a different plan to the plans we've talked about so far.
And it's actually like a a whole type of plan that we haven't covered at all.
And that's a specialization plan.
So in the silver era, they did do specializations.
So they they would do some phases where they would focus on, you know, a particular muscle and, you
know, maybe they would do that for six weeks.
It depend on on the person and how they're programming it.
The way that those specialization phases generally looked was quite different.
How we might see those phases or plans today.
So nowadays, you know, we talk a lot about, OK, there's a muscle we want to focus on.
Maybe you put at the start of the program or you know, maybe you whatever, add some different
exercises for that muscle, whatever it might be.
Typically when you look at these silver area plants, what they actually did is they kind of like
assumed the rest of the, the body.
They said, OK, everything else, you kind of just do what you're normally doing.
You do the standard.
Everyone knew what the standard, you know, your barbell plan was or the standard Milo plan or
whatever it was.
They're like, look, you just do your standard full body stuff and you take out all of them.
The, the, the exercises that affect the muscle you're prioritizing or specializing on, you take that
stuff out and you add this in instead.
That was usually the way they did it.
So what I want to tell you guys about today is a, an arm specialization coming from Piri Radar.
I don't think we've talked about any of Piri stuff yet.
He was, I'm sure we'll talk about him a lot more in the future, but he was a very influential person
in the civil area, especially alongside some of the stuff that the the Weeders were doing.
There's a lot of politics that was going down with Hoffman and Weed at the time.
And Piri actually he he wrote several books on bodybuilding and he wrote a whole lot of lans on like
dumbbell only bodybuilding and barbell only bodybuilding.
And he actually came U with quite a lot of, I guess ecialization methods and like sort of advanced
methods.
And we're going to talk about some of these in the future because some of them are quite funky.
They're they're quite interesting.
He did a lot of work popularizing like a lot of rest pause type training and, and what they used to
call like more breathing type, which is kind of more dress pause anyway.
But this was from one of these books in 1955.
You know, early on, you know, arguably at this point, the rates might be hitting the scene in this
sort of these couple of years. 1954 there was maybe some dabbling, probably didn't do a whole lot in
the 19581950 is where there was more widespread use so this being published in 55.
I'm pretty confident that these methods would have certainly been used by naturals and there's not
really any doubt in my mind there.
O without further ado, this is an specialization phase, remembering that you're adding this on top
of your normal full body stuff.
And you know, one more point I actually want to make is sometimes what they would say is if that was
too much, what you could actually do is do your arms work on other days.
So you would do your the rest of your full body Monday and then Tuesday might do your arm stuff that
wasn't as so.
This jumps back to a podcast that we've already covered when we did Remind me of the Remind me of
the bodybuilders name.
I think it was a Clarence Ross we were talking.
About yes, Clancy Ross.
So we, we talked about that and we explained essentially how people were splitting their three day a
week routines, 4 body routines into a six day a week upper, lower split by essentially taking the
upper and lower components of their four body workout and separating them out across 2 days.
And we talked about the positives and negatives of doing that with the different types of fatigue
that you have to understand the mechanisms.
And actually that's the single most for me in terms of when I get asked questions, it's the single
most shared podcast by me to my audience.
So it is the one that I keep referring back to and and people are asking me why, you know, or what
does it mean when I split out a full body worker into up other components?
What do my, what, what decision process do I have to go through?
Well, literally that podcast answers that question.
And this is really interesting that we're now seeing that concept again coming out in the in the
historical material that you're presenting.
Yeah.
And this is not isolated either.
There's there's quite a few books and publications and lifters who did it this way.
And there was a lot of personal variability there as well.
Like he wouldn't say you have to do this you like he doesn't say, look, you have to do this on
separate days or even the frequency.
He would say, look, do this three times a week, but a lot of people are going to get better results
during it twice a week.
You know, there was an understanding that this is what works for most people, but some people might
have slightly worse recovery.
So this arm specialization phase, we have 12.
I don't know if you'd say exercises, I guess you'd say sets.
We have 12 sets.
OK, Now at this point the set system did exist, obviously 55.
So it was not uncommon to say, do you know 2 sets of this exercise or however many sets.
So the way that he's laid this out is not because he didn't have a different way of doing it.
OK, so set one, we have a barbell curl.
I'll just quickly mention we do 8 to 12 repetitions for all, all sets.
So set one, we have a barbell curl.
Set two, we have a barbell bench.
Then we go back to the barbell curl.
Then we go back to the barbell bench, back to the barbell curl for a third time, back to the barbell
bench for 1/3 time.
Then we have a new, I wouldn't say super set.
It's more like an exercise pair and then we go to a leaning forward single arm dumbbell curl.
O, you're leaning forward single arm dumbbell curl and then that's paired with a flat.
We call this A trisexual extension with a barbell in a bench press position.
So basically what and he said you have to keep your elbows very high.
So essentially we're talking kind of like a barbell skull crusher.
Now, I actually played with this exercise the other day and realized, you know, when you're doing a
skull crusher, generally speaking, your elbows do actually move quite a lot.
They don't stay in position.
So to it's an interesting exercise to play with to keep your elbows high in that position, not
moving them.
It's a little bit different.
I would recommend people give it a go.
It does feel quite, it does feel feel quite good I would say in the triceps anyway.
So flat triceps extension with the elbows high and then back to the leaning forward single arm curl,
back to the flat triceps extension, back to this leaning forward single arm curl and the third set
for the triceps extension.
And that was our specialization.
SO2 exercises well for each Sephoric size in total alternated 12 sets in total.
What are your thoughts on that?
So is this the original bench and curls workout?
I mean, that's the question, isn't it?
I mean, are we have we have we kind of found the origination of that of that meme.
It's it's really interesting, isn't it?
I mean, basically straight away you can see that they have instinctively understood that triceps
long head isn't going to get a stimulus in a multi joint pressing exercise like a bench press.
You need that you need that single joint kind of skull crusher or triceps extension variation.
So that's really interesting.
Also you can see that they've instinctively understood that that leaning forward motion, I'm
assuming that's kind of like a sort of brachyradialis, yes, kind of stimulus.
So you've got that combination.
I mean standing mobile curl is is definitely on the boundary between an even kind of biceps and
brachyradialis stimulus.
But so again, I wouldn't say this perfect.
I would probably have a preacher curl in there instead.
But ultimately, again, you've definitely got that clear understanding that those are doing different
things.
So I think this is a really, really nice example of how silver era bodybuilders were able to look
through the effects of exercises and see the effects those were having because they didn't have that
confusing, confusing effect of of the anabolics that are are so common today.
Yeah, it's interesting, isn't it?
Like obviously we've got like you said this more biases Gracie potentially focus obviously still
getting back around the hours.
But then the second variation is much more Dracula radialis and the fact that they were able to
intrude with that and even intrude that the, the triceps exercises are doing something differently.
And, and when I read their, their books in the publications, they actually intrude this stuff very
well.
You know, when they talk about these Bracula radialis exercises, they make it very clear, like John
Grimek, he's, he's very big on talking about this elbow space.
He's like this space between the elbow that makes the arm look small.
He's like, do these reverse curls do and they they're very clear on this is exactly what fixes that
issue.
And I don't see people diagnosing weak spots like that today.
So it is interesting the the specific exercises these guys are choosing.
Now I do want to ask you, I'm sure people are hearing this being like, holy moly, that's so much
volume.
What's your take on the amount of volume?
Well, as you say, this is this, this is a specialization routine.
And I think when you've talked about these before, you've explained that they're not designed to be
run for long periods of time.
There's an expectation that you would do this and then do something else after maybe four or five
weeks.
So I think again, setting it in context, this is not a routine that people would be expecting to
follow continuously for, you know, months or or years at times.
I think straight away we're kind of discounting away from saying, Oh yeah, you know, clearly they
were doing higher volumes than than we think are, you know, reasonable.
I mean, no, because it's this is not supposed to be done consistently all the time.
So, yeah, I mean, and again, as you say, potentially this replaces, you know, everything that would
have been done, you know, for those muscle groups anyway in the in the other routines.
It's it's, it's designed to set a sort of sit alongside that.
But yeah, I mean, I, I wouldn't be comfortable with especially in that Rep range 8 to 12, you know,
which is that perfect in the middle of moderate load.
So it fits with the the data that we've got, sorry.
It fits with the analysis that we've got a lot of data for In terms of recoverability, I mean, this
is a separate issue, but a lot of people say to me, well, how does recoverability change when I use
heavier loads or light loads?
And like, well, I know directionally what happens, but I can't give you a light bulb.
If you do X number of sets, it will take you X days to recover.
I don't have that data because there just isn't enough study information available.
But this fits in that moderate load zone.
So we can say with reasonable confidence that, yeah, they're doing, you know, what is it six sets
for each muscle group and they're trying to do that three times a week, week.
That is definitely off the top end of the three or four maybe where you would kind of be seeing
recoverability happening normally.
The interesting thing there is that, as you say, they've said, well, maybe 2 * a week is going to be
something that people would want to do instead.
Well, two times a week you could do five sets and the recoverability would be fine.
O They would actually be very close to what I would consider to be recoverable workout volumes in
the case of a 2 * 2 week frequency.
O It's very interesting that despite the fact that so many of the routines that you've talked us
through have been three times a week for body, three times a week for body, it's just the same
pattern again and again and again and again.
Here suddenly they say, well, you might want to do this twice a week.
Well, you can kind of see why because the volume just is a little bit toppy for, you know, people
who are trying to, you know, make progress over over a period of time.
A lot of greater stuff.
He does have a lot of these specialization type, the ideas and methods and he's certainly one of the
authors that is most explicit about how a lot of people are going to do better twice a week.
That's not a thing you see come up as much.
You know, often it goes the other way.
You know, Hoffman, he talks a lot about hey, every other day, if you can do every other day, great,
you're probably going to see better results.
But it is it's sort of the opposite reaction with, right?
Well, with these volumes, with these workout volumes, I'm not surprised at all.
I know we have talked about this, I've asked you about this in the past, but just a flag that
obviously there is regional differences here in what's being biased with these different exercises.
And so it's possible that that would have a difference in damage compared to doing just six sets on
one of those exercises, isn't it?
Yeah, absolutely.
It's, it's a very difficult question.
I mean, we do see extreme, I mean with, I mean you asked me for some of these studies and I sent
them over to you a while ago because it's very interesting to see just how different the patterns of
damage are.
When you look at different exercises, you see totally different parts of the muscle being, you know,
affected depending on what technology you're using to measure that.
So what you might, what you might see is that the very top end of the motor unit pool, you've got
different motor units being used in certain exercises than in the other exercises.
And as a result, you're not actually 'cause obviously damage is primarily occurring in the fastest
switch and muscle fibers at the very top end of the Motuna pool.
So if you change which fibers those are, then yes, what you're going to see is that even though
you've got six sets, you might see something closer to three sets and three sets on two different
regions within the muscle.
But it really depends on just how different they are.
And that's one of the great difficulties that we have at the moment, ultimately leading to this
controversy that we're finding ourselves in the moment, which we're going to talk about later on,
which is, you know, just how different our exercises.
I mean, how much difference are there?
What does that difference entail?
What does it mean?
And ultimately, what does that then mean for us when we're programming?
So yes, absolutely there is a possibility that you could have, you know, actually much less of a
problem because you are actually creating damage in different regions.
And obviously that yes, overall across the whole body, if you like, you've got the same amount of
damage, but it's distributed and therefore you don't have the same problems in the recovery process.
It's it's possible if the exercises were sufficiently different in terms of the mode against that
we're recruiting that it could be akin to say doing three sets on biceps and then three sets on
cards.
Obviously you can create a spectrum.
It's like talking about the stability spectrum.
When you talk about the stability spectrum, you've got everything from, you know, kind of standing
on a very unstable surface, using an unstable load, and then all the way to the opposite of the
spectrum.
You've got a dynamometer where you're strapped in and you can't move everything in the middle.
You've got freeways and machines and everything.
Everything just sits on that spectrum.
We're dealing with the spectrum situation here as well.
So what we're saying is you've named the spectrum at the opposite end, which is like biceps and
calves.
You just can't get far enough apart.
You know, it's like, sorry, you can't get further apart than that.
You've literally got, you know, opposite ends of the body.
As you come closer and closer and closer, you start to get to the point where you've got some into,
you know, sort of cross contamination, if you like, where you're using some fibers in certain
situations.
And I have been at people have asked me this question.
It's like, well, so if I'm doing a multi joint exercise, like a pull down or a row and then I want
to do curls, what what's going on there?
I'm like, yeah, that's, that's in that, in that Gray zone of the spectrum where you are using the
biceps, so you're using a chunk of the muscle fibers.
But we don't have a really good way of quantifying exactly how far the motor unit pull you're going.
In that example you just gave there, ultimately what you'd say is what you're not using, you're not
damaging.
Right.
Well, you're neither damaging nor training.
I mean, that's always the issue.
I mean, and I hope nobody's going to run away with the idea that damage therefore means training.
But I kind of like sort of have to watch myself sometimes because I think, you know, people run away
with an idea and then it's it's all over the Internet.
But yeah, essentially it's activation really that it what it what it all comes back to because
activation is a starting process for both the hypertrophy stimulus and also for the damage process.
Well, this is very much what we want to be talking about today.
So I, I might leave the plan behind.
Let's just follow this this train of thought right now because our topic today is ultimately I'll,
I'll actually just pass over to you, you introduce what today's topic is.
So, so basically what we'd like to address today is this question of what different exercises for a
given muscle group are actually doing.
So, you know, if I, for example, were to do a preacher curl and then another day or in another part
of the workout, I were to do a reverse grip, you know, easy bar curl, perhaps even against elastic
resistance or with a leaning forward position or just even a standing biceps curl.
I mean, how are these exercises actually physiologically different?
Now, the reason that we want to talk about this topic is because currently there is a very popular
idea that it's possible to train all of a muscle or all of a muscle group with a particular
exercise, but additionally target one particular region.
So for example, you might argue or you might hear somebody say that the, for example, the narrow
grip row trains all of the lats, but it does give a bit more of a focus to the UER region.
The wide grip ulldown trains all of the lat, but it gives a bit more focus to the low region.
You might see somebody say, well, you know, the incline bench trains all of the packs, but it gives
a bit more focus to the clavicular region, the upper region.
So again, you can do this for biceps.
You can talk about the calves.
I mean, the point is that people are saying, influencers are saying that an exercise trains the
whole of a muscle or a whole of a muscle group, all of its regions, but additionally trains one
region slightly more.
That statement is physiologically 100% impossible and that's basically what I want to explain.
You know, the fundamental basis of what we're going to talk about today, because essentially what we
talk about when we talk about differences between exercises is whether or not the same muscle fibers
are activated.
That's it.
We're not talking about anything else.
So if you are looking at an arrogant row, then what you're at, the question you're asking is which
muscle fibers in the latissimus dorsi are actually activated.
Now, if, if your fitness influencer says to you what they all are, if, if that's their answer, OK,
a, we've got a question about voluntary activation deficits, and I'll come on to that in a moment.
If they're arguing, Oh well, no, no, you know, all of the fibers you're capable of activating are
activated in that, in that exercise.
Well, then what you can't then have is a targeting effect.
You can't because if you've activated the fiber and you're moving slowly, then that fiber is going
to get a maximum stimulus by per trophy that the only two things that matter are activation plus
movement speed in, in strength training context that we're talking about.
So ultimately, if the fibers are activated in that strength training set that you're doing and
you've trained close to failure, ultimately they've all got a maximal stimulus that you can possibly
get for that set.
What you can't do is say, well, no, no, no, no, I get an extra stimulus on this region.
But how, what's the mechanism?
If the fibers are all activated?
They're all activated.
You can't activate the fiber more.
It's like it's either on or off.
It's like you don't get that effect in the strength training situation.
So ultimately what we're saying here is that you can't have a scenario where an exercise targets a
specific region but also trains the entirety of that muscle or muscle.
So this has really big implications, and especially for people who are writing programs, this is
really important because an obvious issue here is either, and even you can bias different parts of
muscle, which I would assume most people would agree that you can.
But if that is true, then that means that we need to really take atrophy seriously.
Because if you're using an exercise to bias a particular part of muscle, then whenever that exercise
is not being done, you're subject to atrophy in those fibers that were being biased by that
particular exercise.
If yeah, So what you're describing, what you're describing is the the correct view.
So I've described the problematic view that you're that people are hearing in the in the industry at
the moment, which is that fitness influencers are saying that you can essentially have the entirety
of a muscle activated, but additionally a region activated more.
No, you can't.
So what you've described there is the correct interpretation, which is that if two exercises are
different and one is biasing one region and another is biasing a different region, what that means?
Is that there are some fibers activated in exercise A that are not activated in exercise B and vice
versa.
So the example I was giving and the very controversial example, which is that if you've got a narrow
grip row and you're in the sagittal plane, you've got more.
You've got activation happening in the upper latissimer's door side.
That is not happening when you do your wide grip pull down and vice versa.
You've got activation of the lower regions of the Latin, the wide grip that you're not getting in
that narrow group.
That's the only way.
That is the literal only way that biasing of exercises or sorry, biasing of muscles using exercises
is possible.
So that's the issue.
If you think that biasing of the muscle is possible during exercise, the only way that can happen is
if it's actually activating fibres that are not activated somewhere else.
Yeah, yeah.
So.
So either biasing occurs, in which case actively will occur, and you need to train that that exact
exercise.
Ultimately, at a high frequency, more biasing doesn't happen, in which case there's no point with
exercise variation.
Well, this is the point.
This is what I was laughing about with you at the before we get jumped on this podcast because I was
saying the same fitness influences that say that you can, you know, basically train the entirety of
a muscle with any of these exercises.
They're the same people who try and kind of show their audience a new funky exercise every kind of
couple of weeks and go, hey, I've got this amazing new exercise that does this thing.
I'm like, hang on a minute.
You're the person who thinks that every exercise does the same one thing.
So why are you advertising this new kind of exercise that you find really exciting?
If you think that because ultimately they don't have a model in their minds of how biasing works.
They just think, oh, well, this, you know, activation is more or no activation is the process of
switching on muscle fibers.
So when you have an exercise that is better at a certain training, a certain region, it means that
there are more fibers activated in that region during that exercise than you get in any other
exercise.
Well, that now means that as you've pointed out, if I want to train those muscle fibers multiple
times per week, I have to do that exercise multiple times per week.
If I've got an exercise that's brilliant at training a particular part of a muscle, I can't just do
that once a week.
Because if I just do it once a week, then what's going to happen is I get that atrophy occurring for
those fibers that are uniquely trained by that exercise in the rest of the week before.
Even though I'm training the same muscle two more times that week, it's not actually activating
those fibers and it's not training those fibers and I'm not getting that stimulus except for that
single training session that I do with that exercise.
That's exactly right.
It's huge programming.
Programming implications.
Yeah.
And This is why we keep saying everything comes back to muscle fibre.
Yeah, atrophy, hypertrophy be muscle fibre specific.
Exactly because ultimately if we understand that all of these processes damage hypertrophy, whatever
are muscle fibre specific, then you have to then say, well, OK, if I'm activating different fibres
in different exercises, then the hypertrophy processes are unique to those fibres that are being
activated in those exercises.
Suddenly the idea of, you know, kind of doing an upper lower split with one exercise for one for the
for one for the muscle, like a narrow grit bro on you know, one day and then doing a why could pull
down a different day of the week.
And that's your training program for the laps in a week.
It's not going to work because you're literally just training that unique set of fibers that are
trained by those exercises once per week.
Yes, there is overlap.
Absolutely you're going to get overlap.
You're going to get some hypertrophy happening, but you're not going to get that top chunk of the
motor unit pull at the very top end kind of trained effect.
So my observation when I sort of take a lay of the land and I look at how people are programming, I
would say that the vast majority of people are in fact programming this way, where one exercise
might be repeated once a week and they've got it might be up, lower, up, lower, it might be even
full body, But these are all unique workouts.
And sometimes it's even beyond a week.
And I actually see this a lot in, you know, quote UN quote, the science based lifting world where
people will be doing multiple rotations.
It'll be like, you know, say upper, lower, upper, lower four times a week, but then they've got like
8 different workouts to the cycling over 2 weeks.
And So what we want to make really clear here, the Physiology is this can not work.
So what do people?
Need.
Well, when we say it can't work, it can't.
It can't maximize the hypertrophy across the whole muscle.
What's going to happen?
You've got to basically think about the exercises for a given muscle as having fibers that are
shared with other exercises and fibers that are not shared with other exercises.
So essentially if you've got a narrow group row on one day and a wide group pull down on another
day, you've got a number of fibers that are shared across those two exercises and hypertrophy will
happen relatively effectively across that training week even.
If it's a Venn diagram.
Right, it's a Venn diagram.
Exactly.
Overlapping fibers.
Exactly.
And in some cases, as I said before, this is because this is a spectrum effect.
In some cases you might have like imagine if you did a flat bench with a transverse plane, like a
really wide grip, and then you literally just elevated the bench by 10° for your second exercise.
The overlap there would be incredibly close.
You would be almost identical, but there would be a tiny difference.
If you start pushing the incline really high, you're going to see massive differences.
So ultimately it's a spectrum effect and the more different the exercise and generally things like
plane of motion, like going from sagittal plane to frontal plane is a really big effect, you know,
so like, that's why I've always argued very strongly that the lat situation with sagittal versus
frontal plane is, is they're completely different regions that are being used there.
It's just like pecs, you know, lats, pecs.
Fundamentally it's working the same kind of way.
So we've got to imagine a Venn diagram where you've got some shared fibers and some unshared fibers.
And the unshared fibers, you're suffering this effect where you're only going to get a training
stimulus for the number of times per week that you do that unique exercise.
Yeah.
So that Venn diagram, it can be moving closer together.
There can be more overlap, or there can be less overlap, but there's always going to be something
coming out of those edges.
Yeah, I mean, whatever you do to change things, there's always going to be some degree of, I mean,
the example that you gave when we were talking about this planning, this podcast, you say, well,
what amount of the difference between a squat and a leg press?
And that's a brilliant example of something that you're going to see a lot of overlap, but you're
probably going to see some little bits around the edges, especially with the hip extensors, because
hip extensors are moving through completely different ranges of motion in a squat from a leg press
with leg pressure pretty much kind of squashed into hip flexion the whole way through.
Whereas in obviously the squat, you come up all the way into hip extension.
So you would expect there to be differences there.
How can we quantify that?
I don't know.
I really don't know it.
It's going to be very, very difficult to get at.
But ultimately those are the kind of very small differences that are interesting to speculate about
and more importantly for programming points of view.
And that's why I've created that muscle resources or muscle regions resources guide.
You know, where I said, look, these are the big rocks.
These are the, these are the massively different areas that you can target.
And this is basically explaining how that targeting process works.
So hopefully what I'm about to say makes sense.
The way I see it is a lot of these people who are programming this way, I guess it's like trying to
have you cake and eat it too.
So they're saying, look, I'm using this different exercise because it biases this, this region or
whatever, right?
And ultimately, either they need to be making an argument that actually there's hardly any biasing
happening.
So therefore we're not really losing much because obviously if we're biasing significant portions of
the muscle, like you said, if you're only train that once a week, it's a very, very inefficient way
of doing it.
Or they're saying, hey, look, this is a great exercise because it really biases this region.
And so then that Venn diagram has even less overlap.
And that means there's even more inefficiency or more you're kind of losing out by doing that.
So is it like is it better to be have more overlap than biasing something less or is it better to be
biasing something more like either way to lose lose situation in that scenario isn't?
It exactly the position that these influences are taking is completely untenable.
The Physiology doesn't allow them to make the arguments they're making.
You know, either biasing doesn't happen and every single exercise just uses the same muscle fibers.
And we know we can address that in a few minutes and why that's impossible.
But you know, either every, you know, and in which case you could just literally pick, you know, 10
or so exercises and just do those for the rest of your life.
And it wouldn't actually matter that you'd never did anything any different at all.
You could just do those exercises and you would never see anything different occurring from changing
them.
Or alternatively, there is biasing happening.
And if biasing happens, then suddenly now we're in the zone that we were describing, which is that
different exercises are omitting some fibers that other exercises are training.
And in that scenario, you get into this place where you've got this frequency problem.
And I just want to kind of segue that into something that we again mentioned when we were planning
this podcast, which is that a lot of people are asking me and I think they're asking you as well,
why can't you do full body ABC?
Now when we say full body ABC, what that means is that the workouts of the week, 3 workouts of the
week, 3 * a week is the conventional kind of frequency of a full body.
So three times a week full body ABC means you're doing a different workout AB and C workouts.
Can I interject with that for one moment because there's actually I've had a lot of questions on
that exact topic because I sometimes will program three different exercises.
Yes, but you know what you're doing.
No, but but also sometimes what I'll do is have two lots of exercise, 2 exercises that are like each
exercise repeated twice over those 3 workouts is what I'm saying.
So the workout itself may look unique, but the exercises aren't in fact being repeated.
Yeah, this is about exercises.
This is not OK.
So another question that I get is if you do, if you have a workout and you reorder the exercises,
but you do exactly the same exercises each workout, is that ABC or is it something different?
I would say that's a dash one A-2A-3 because what you're doing there is you're doing identical
exercises from a hypertroy point of view that's identical that that's work at a done three times.
It's just what you're trying to do is change the recruitment levels slightly to make sure that you
at least capture some degree of.
And again, that is going to cause a similar kind of problem for you if you're not careful.
But it also isn't necessarily like that.
That's really interesting topic because it is causing the same problem.
But it has it's a problem that has a benefit as well because if you are setting the last 1st and you
are causing motor energy treatment increases in that, you're still getting that benefit next session
where you have that exercise last.
Exactly.
It does come with a concomitant sort of side effect that you are that you are using to help
yourself.
So even though you've got the same problem in the sense that yes, you are losing fiber access
because of that supraspinal CNS fatigue effect, you are still going to see some benefits from doing
it because as you say, the earlier exercises are more likely to see increases in recruitment as an
adaption.
So, but the point is that that is not identical scenario to saying workout ABCABC.
What we're saying there is that you've chosen different exercises for each muscle.
Like you might do narrow grip row in one workout, wide grip pull down in the second workout and a
pullover in a third workout.
I mean like just picking three exercises or you do incline press and PEC deck and you know, whatever
else, again, pull over I suppose.
And you could say, well, those are my 3 PEC exercises.
Well, that would be ABC.
Now what you've got there is that each exercise is going to have some unshared fiber activations
with the other exercises in that week.
As a result, those fibers that are uniquely trained in each exercise will only get a stimulus once
per week.
Now, if you're training full body three times a week, you're going to be doing probably around three
sets per muscle group per per workout or even three sets per exercise if you're only doing one
exercise for that muscle group per workout, which is probably true.
In that scenario, you can't get growth long term over time because maintenance is 3 or 4 sets per
for a single workout per week.
So if you've trained those fibers, those uniquely activated fibers by the exercise only once per
week, you are not going to see growth long term as a result of doing it.
And just to kind of really emphasize this point, when people say to me, Oh no, no, no, no, no,
maintenance studies don't really mean that.
They just mean that the rate of growth is really, really slow.
No, look at the maintenance studies.
Some of them run out for six months.
This is not like 4 weeks of maintenance.
This is like some of them are running out a really long time.
And there's not still not seeing any growth as a result of doing those, those once per week training
sessions.
So the maintenance studies are literally the slam dunk for the atrophy question.
You can't get around them.
They've got nothing to do with muscle swelling.
You can't see muscle swelling happening with one workout with three sets once a week.
That's not happening.
You know, it's not about, you know, a really slow rate of growth because the studies would run out
for a really long period of time.
You know, ultimately maintenance completely, it's maintenance literature completely destroys every
argument everybody's got against the atrophy question, which is why they never talk about it.
I mean, that's an interesting observation in and of itself.
I always look at what people don't talk about because if they don't talk about, it means that it
undermines their argument or ultimately translation completely destroys everybody's argument against
atrophy occurring quickly because it's controlling for the problems that we see elsewhere, which is
things like, you know, the muscle swelling problem.
And to be super clear, when we're talking about full body ABC and you've just said if you're doing
three sets per muscle, then it's not going to grow.
We are talking about the Venn diagram again and we're saying.
Exactly the unshared fibers.
The unshared fibers exactly only.
Obviously you can follow this and get bigger.
We're not saying you can't.
Again, this is one of those weird things it's like people say to me.
Oh well, you say that bro.
Splits don't work.
I'm like, where did I say that?
I literally I've got a weekly net stimulus model that shows you that bro specs do work and you're
telling me and you're now making stuff up about me.
You're saying that I've said that they don't work.
I've not said that, but people have got these kind of like 2 dimensional brains where they think
that if it's like if I say it's less effective, Oh no, it doesn't work.
No, no, no, I didn't say that it's less effective it.
Doesn't work as well.
Like it doesn't work as well.
It's like.
Comparative.
You know the weekly net stimulus model.
If it gives you a positive number, that means it's going to produce hypertrophy every time.
So basically this hopefully answers and I'm going to start linking this podcast when people ask me
this question and my Instagram questions.
This hopefully answers the problem of why full body with an ABC workout format across a week,
training three times a week can't optimize hypertrophy.
It's because those unshed fibres that are unique to specific exercises are only being trained once
per week with probably a maximum of three sets, and that isn't enough to create hypertroy over time.
Yeah, perfect.
So what else do people need to know about this topic?
So the other, the other interesting thing is, well, how does training status play into this?
Now training status is a really interesting thing because a lot of people will say that study was
done in beginners, therefore I can ignore it.
I'm like, OK, please describe to me the physiological differences between trained and untrained
people and why you think you can therefore ignore that untrained population study and they can't
give you an answer because it's emotional for them.
They're like, I, I self identify as a trained person.
Therefore I can ignore everything that's untrained because it's not relevant to me.
So well, that's not a scientific process.
Tell me what the differences are.
And then that will then allow.
And again, people, again, people do this when they say I'm just going to ignore animal studies
because I'm not a mouse.
And I'm like, I'm sympathetic to that viewpoint, but ultimately there are differences and there are
similarities.
And if you know what they are, you can control for that in your thought processes and you can use
studies that are useful and ignore ones that are not.
But anyway, coming back to the more serious question of advanced versus that kind of, you know,
beginner lifters in those situations, it's like, well, what's the physiological difference between
or what are the physiological differences between untrained people and or trained people?
Well, we know straight away that things like soccer Mara genesis are going to be really difficult to
create in more or trained people.
So you can kind of use that as an observation.
And that's a really interesting one because you can say all those untrained studies that were done,
you know, straight mediate hypertrophy, you can ignore those.
And it's like, again, people like to use them, but again, they're all in untrained people, but you
can't.
And then the difference is relevant for us though, is that if we look at the way the size principle
of striated muscle works, which is not Hammond size principle, it's a different size principle.
Size principle striated muscle says that fibers stop growing and when they get to certain sizes and
the more oxidative a fibre is smaller it will get stuck at, so it will get stuck at a smaller size
or plateau at a smaller size than a more glycolytic fiber.
What that means is that as you look at the motor unit pool, when you go from oxidative to
glycolytic, the fibers will stop growing earlier, You know in the hypertrophy journey, they'll stop
growing earlier than the fibers are to higher up the motor unit pool.
So if you've got an advanced person, it's quite.
Easy, they start growing earlier like they have their their size they'll.
Stop growing into smaller size so they'll hit a Yeah, they'll be capped into smaller diameter or
cross-sectional area O.
If you've got a more well trained person, the probability is that if you were to look at the lower
end of their high threshold motion at all, they couldn't grow any of that stuff.
Because ultimately that is capped out because it's quite alternative.
So the fibers can't really grow very far.
So what you're looking at then is this situation where the advanced person probably has only growth
capacity right at the top end of the Moat unit pool.
Well, that's precisely where your unshared fibers are located if you're talking about different
exercises.
And it's like now suddenly we're kind of saying, well, you know, if you're a really advanced person,
you can't be making this mistake.
You know this mistake is going to stop you from progressing quite a effectively.
If you're at the well trained end of the spectrum as a beginner, you're going to have much more
capacity to see growth happening still.
We're going to express the same problem, but you're not going to be basically trapped in that place
where you can only achieve growth in those unshed fibres.
See, this is interesting because people who are programming in these different rotations, you know,
upper, lower, but.
That's because people see complexity and they go, Oh, well, you know, that is a more sophisticated
problem because a program, because it's more, you know, it's sophistication comes from understanding
how Physiology works.
But they have superficial complexity because most people are fooled by that.
Or a lot.
I don't say most is quite rude, but many people are fooled by that.
Yeah.
So it looks complex and people assume this is going to be better for a complex or an advanced
lifter.
And in fact, what you're saying is, is the opposite.
And I don't program that way.
But if I were like every now and then, I might, for a beginner actually program an ABC.
And despite what I mentioned before, and the reason I would do that is because, as we said, the Venn
diagram analogy, there's a lot of overlap.
Yes, it may not be optimal, but what I'm doing is I'm trying to work in coordination.
So I might give them an exercise ABC because I want to use those exercises later on knowing that
there's some fibres that are missing out, but each exercise is still causing growth in that
beginner.
For an advanced lifter, as you've illustrated there, if there's sufficient differences, isn't
there's not like that.
That bit that's not overlapping is a bit that's causing growth in that advanced lifter.
Doing that approach is really going to be quite redundant.
Exactly.
I mean, I think you can.
As you say, if you have different goals for a training program, then you can you know make a case
for programming ABC.
But that situation you're ceasing to program a pure hypertrophy goal oriented program and you now
have like a longer term view.
You're developing characteristics that are very useful for that person over the long term, but it's
not short term kind of maximizing hypertrophy.
I can see what that makes sense.
So, OK, where have we landed so far?
We've said that if biasing occurs, which I mean it's hard to make the argument that it doesn't
occur, then you're laughing at that people still.
Trying to I'm waiting for people because ultimately when you kind of like, you kind of explain these
things and the Internet starts to understand how they work, and then they start to question the
influences on their social media and the influencers start to try and find an exit.
Where's the nearest exit?
How can I get out of this problem I created for myself?
Then this.
The obvious answer is to just deny that biasing happens.
I mean, ultimately that's the only exit they've got is to deny that biasing happens.
Any other exit?
Is the exits.
Let's let's just let the exits here.
That's not strategically very sound because you should always leave your opponent room to perform a
an orderly retreat, otherwise things get really messy.
So.
Anyway, let's let's do this, that biasing dilemma question.
You know, obviously even if we don't get into the Physiology of it, what we said there is well, if
biasing doesn't happen, then there's no point doing these other exercises.
Yeah, if biasing doesn't happen, you can just pick your favorite 10 exercises for the whole body and
just do them forever.
And it went literally no physiological benefits will accrue from doing anything different.
And as I said before, the corollary of that is that when your influencer says, I found this new
amazing exercise that targets XY or Z and well, no, it can't happen because you can't do that.
That's if you take that philosophical viewpoint.
Now, I absolutely don't agree with that.
And I can, you know, make a case for why in a moment, but ultimately that's, that's that one sort of
sort of place you could stand and and make an argument from.
And so then the next exit I've seen people try to take is saying, well, hang on, no, no, no.
It does recruit all moding units, all available moding units, but it just provides more of a
stimulus to some of those.
And then you do another exercise that biases something else and provides a little bit more of a
stimulus to one region, but you're still getting activation and stimulus and everything else.
That's the nonsense that's physiologically impossible.
That's where I started this on a podcast explanation because there is no explanation of what that
stimulus is coming from.
It's like when they say there's a great stimulus where how you can't activate the fiber more.
Yep.
So it's either on or off and you've got the loading caused by the velocity and the velocity is the
same across the whole muscle more or less.
OK, you can argue that differently, but it's not going to be a.
In fact, and people might try to then say, well hang on, maybe it's that it's not active until the
last repetition or two, so they're only getting.
One, no, because stimulating Rep theory kind of tells you that you've got the last five reps or so
of the set.
So you covered with high maximum levels of recruiting in that scenario?
That doesn't make.
Sense you can, yeah, there's no exit at all.
As I say philosophically, you could make the case and just say well, no, you can just do the same
exercise forever.
And I respect that viewpoint.
People want to start because at least it's consistent, it's intellectually consistent.
The nonsense is this bit in the middle where people say you can have a muscle that's fully activated
within reason, as in within capabilities, but simultaneously bias in one area, that that's a
physiological impossibility.
I mean, it just can't happen, you know?
So that's the thing I wanted to really kind of squash with this, with this podcast.
The the physiological rationale is this kind of thing I've kept mentioning and not explaining, which
is the voluntary activation deficit.
So when we say that something has a muscle, has a voluntary activation deficit, what we mean is that
we can't access every single muscle fire in the muscle.
We can't maximally recruit every single motor unit voluntarily.
And we know that because of tests like the interpolated twitch technique, which measure volunteer
activation.
And they say here we're going to do a maximal effort contraction.
Notice maximal effort contraction.
So when people say to me, Oh no, no, no, this is not maximal effort or these are maximal efforts.
So you do maximal effort and then they apply an electrical stimulus to see if they can find anywhere
in the muscle that's not activated.
And they don't actually look very hard.
If they find anything, then it's, you know, kind of implies that there's probably a lot more there
as well.
So they're massively under, in my opinion, they massively underestimate the deficit.
But anyway, you get a electrical stimulus which increases force production and that tells you that
you are not fully activating the muscle voluntarily, that you're capable of actually producing more
force if you were able to access more motor units.
Why is there a limitation on that?
Well, this is, you know, kind of sort of psychobiological model of fatigue basics.
Ultimately, there is a central motor command produced by the brain.
It's limited by a maximum tolerable perception of effort.
The central motor command produces recruitment.
Once you hit your maximum tolerable potential effort, you can't increase recruitment anymore because
you can't increase central mode command anymore.
Ultimately that means that you've always got deficits and the bigger the muscle or the bigger the
muscle group, the bigger the deficit tends to be.
The glutes, quads, you can get deficits of 20 plus percent.
You tend to get smaller and smaller deficits.
The smaller muscle that you're trying to activate makes sense.
So ultimately, if you've got a launch activation deficit and if you're following your own chemical
matching and you're basically using whatever mode units in the order that is most efficient, as you
start to increase towards your maximum level of effort, you'll take a different path with one
exercise because you'll use a different set of motives than you will for another exercise.
And when you get to your maximum number of motives you can recruit.
What you'll find is that the ones that are not activated, not recruited, are different in each of
those two exercise situations.
So the presence of voluntary activation deficits completely destroys the argument.
To those people who are saying neuro mechanical matching doesn't apply in maximum efforts because
the body activates everything.
No, it doesn't.
That's what a voluntary activation deficit tells you.
So if you can just look at the literature and see that voluntary activation deficits exist, you
would know that your argument against neurochemical matching in maximum effort situations is
completely and utterly invalid.
And again, it just comes back to knowing how Physiology works and being able to put all these things
in place.
So with a voluntary activation deficit, we know that you take a different journey in your motiate
recruitment order.
With certain exercises, you recruit different regions and the UN activate or deactivate unactivated
as and you don't even get to activate them.
It's not like deactivate because you're not the unactivated mossifiers.
The ones you haven't switched on are going to be different in each case of those exercises that you
are doing.
So that's why I think that there is a definitively strong case for arguing that different exercises
do activate completely different fibers at the top end of the motor unit pool, simply because of the
way that neural mechanical matching works in conjunction with presence of voluntary activation
deficit.
Which is a similar thing that we see with the bilateral deficit, isn't it?
So the bilateral force deficit is underpinned by a bilateral motor unit recruitment deficit.
So essentially when I do 2 and I use two arms or two legs to do an exercise, I have lower level of
average force across the two legs than I do with a single leg or a single arm.
And similarly, I see a lower level of recruitment across the two legs than I do with, you know, a
single leg or a single arm.
So what's happening there is that the brain is capable of sending more activation to a single muscle
because it doesn't have to send central motor commands to two places.
Now it's not linear, you know, you can end up with 50% activation in each leg, but it's, it's
probably about 1015% difference.
So it's really, really meaningful.
The people within just go with that a little bit further.
So then people might ask, well, does this apply then to unilateral exercises?
Like if you were to do a single arm curl one day and then a bilateral curl the next day, does that
therefore mean that there's a trouble?
And that would take us back to what I mentioned.
That is the same issue as the exercise order problem with the workout A-1A-3, because what you're
doing there is you're actually using the unilateral exercise to increase motor recruitment levels as
an adaption over time.
And that then gives you that kind of ability to push your levels of recruitment higher in your
bilateral exercise variations.
So you're not necessarily using unilateral exercise as a way to increase muscle size.
You're using it more as a way to increase Mote unit equipment capacity.
Now if you're using it in a specialization routine, you'd probably be doing it more than once per
week.
I think if you're using unilateral for hypertrophy purposes, then yeah, you are going to have to
think about it as a a different exercise from your bilateral version that is the same exercise.
I agree.
I have a few more, I guess practical questions.
Is there anything else you wanted to touch on from the Physiology perspective?
No, that's, that's, I mean, that's already quite a lot of Physiology for 1A podcast.
But this, this question has, as I said to you before we jumped on and started this question has
aggravated me.
And I don't aggravate very easily.
It's aggravated me because ultimately, as you pointed out, as we were going through, it all stems
back to the observation that hypertrophy is muscle fiber specific.
And it's the one thing that I think people get wrong.
And whenever they get it wrong, everything just falls apart.
Hypertrophy researchers get it wrong, fitness influencers get it wrong.
Even when they understand it, they still get it wrong.
I mean, we've had this conversation before, I think where you pointed out that there's a difference.
There's some fitness influences that just don't understand it and therefore the programming doesn't
work because they don't understand it.
But then there's also some fitness influences that understand it cognitively.
But then when they actually program, they don't program in a way that takes it into account.
And that's really interesting.
It's kind of like their brains are stuck in that kind of historical, traditional way of programming
that they've grown up with.
I'm not saying it's traditionally in the true historical sense that we talk about, but in the sense
that their journey across the last sort of however many decades and they look at it and they go, Oh
no, I don't like programming like that.
But then their cognitive parts of how they understand the Physiology and their programming practical
parts on and meshing together.
So this, this has aggravated me.
I'm I'm a little bit upset about the fact that people don't seem to be able to sort of connect the
teaching that I've been providing with the implications for that.
So I wanted to try and, you know, kind of cross that, cross that, or connect those two things
together in this podcast.
I mean, it is, it is really important because it it just doesn't fit with model.
So people who are advocating for the model, but then doing this in the.
Exactly, exactly.
It doesn't make sense.
One rebuttal that I've heard floating around, I'm not sure where, but people keep asking me about
it.
We say the hypertrophy is muscle fibre specific and people say well no, it's Modi unit specific.
Can you just speak to that for a moment?
Well, the motor unit basically, you know, kind of comprises the motor neuron and all of the motor,
I'm sorry, on all of the muscle fibers that the motor neuron innovates.
So I mean, that's the description you're going to read in a textbook, you know, the motor neuron
plus the muscle fibers.
So Physiology researchers get a little bit testy with me when I say this, but I like to call a motor
unit a group of muscle fibers and they they're kind of go no, no, no, no, no, you can't say that.
It's more, you know, kind of complicated than that.
I'm like, yeah, but for the audience I'm talking to, most of the time is valid to say that a motor
unit is just a group of muscle fibers.
So if you say that hypertrophy is motor unit specific, what you're saying is that it is group of
muscle fibers specific.
Fine, no problem at all.
What we're saying then is that when you've got unshared motor units or unshared muscle fibers
between two exercises, then what you're going to find is that you have a difference in the location
of the hypertrophy that is being produced by one exercise compared to the other.
You're literally just saying exactly the same thing, just using different terminology.
And as I think you pointed out in one of your stories recently, people use terminology to confuse
and distract and obfuscate, you know what they're saying so that people can't argue with them.
But also ultimately noting it's muscle fibers, we're saying the same thing.
Basically saying multiple muscle fibers like it's.
Just a group of muscle fibers if you want to do that.
And I'll say Physiology researchers get very testy with me when I say that, but it's not
fundamentally wrong as far as we're concerned.
The implication is the same.
Now, everything we've said so far regarding exercise once a week or once every two weeks, depending
on how people are programming it, these are the same issues.
That's that one might face from phase to phase.
And so if you are in fact maybe programming correctly and you're using an exercise twice a week or
three times a week and you're doing that for four weeks or six weeks or 8 weeks.
And then you go into a new phase and you're not using the same exercise and using an exercise which
you need to go back to the Venn diagram, There's, there's overlap where it wasn't training something
or isn't training what was previously being training being trained.
You're falling to the same issue, aren't you?
Exactly.
And this is really where I'm very, very negative on on periodization because there are 100 ways that
you can make a mistake when you're writing periodized training programs.
Absolutely, 100 ways and you can, you can end up doing some really good work for a couple of weeks
or months and then unpicking that over the following couple of weeks and months because you've
admitted to, you know, train a muscle or region of a muscle correctly in that subsequent phase.
And you end up losing the benefits of what you've worked so hard to get.
Not periodizing people think again, it's like this complexity must be better.
You know, not periodizing people look at you and go, you know, you're a beginner.
Do you not know what you're doing?
Well, why are you being so simplistic in the way that you're programming?
Because it's actually better in the long term.
And I've taken to saying to people, you know, when they asked me about periodization, and this
applies to athletic situations as well.
You know, if something is important, do it all the time.
If it's not important, don't do it at all.
You know, it's like pick the.
And again, we both do this on when we're giving advice about how to write a training program, you
know, first start with everything that you want to do in terms of exercise selection.
Start with that list and then apportion it, you know, because at least then you've got a chance of
making sure that you've got all of your bases covered in every single training block that you do.
It's actually a really good way to fix periodization problems is to start with the list of things
that you know you need to do so you don't miss anything out.
I mean, that's cardinal sin number one is missing something out getting like, you know, kind of two
months down the line and realizing that you've not got exercise for the rec firm or, you know,
something kind of, you know, that's really just going to drop out in other scenarios, you know, make
sure you've got your list and then and then apportion it.
Now in the apportionment.
You made this point earlier today, so you have to make sure you're at least getting your twice a
week stimulus for each region.
If you're doing full body three times a week or up low 6 * a week, whatever you want to do, you do
need to make sure you're getting that two or three, preferably 3, but at least two times a week.
Otherwise you're going to find yourself stuck on maintenance.
Now, this is really important because what I've just shown you there is that if you've done, if
you've started with your list at least, the worst thing that can happen is you end up on
maintenance.
You know, if you miss it out completely, then you're going to go backwards quite quickly.
And if you at least got it in there once a week, then you'll be on maintenance.
So that's the worst that can happen if you at least covered your bases for each block that you do.
After that, making sure you've got twice a week, probably three times a week is even better.
But ultimately, I think that would be the way that I would approach it.
But honestly, for me, the a lot of the periodization stuff is just, again, this idea of people
trying to write stuff that looks more complicated or complex because they think that is more
attractive to the audience that they're writing.
You made the point of of starting by writing out all the exercises you need to train what you want
to train and and that second part there, what you want to train.
I think that's really important, and I think a lot of people miss that because people now assume you
need an exercise bias in your region and not everyone necessarily wants that and needs that.
And that's made very clear when we look at a lot of these silly guys, this whole region sometimes
when simply not being trained, and yet their physiques were amazing.
So obviously we're advocates for biasing and training regions if someone wants maximal development,
but we need to understand that a lot of people in the gym who just want to look a bit better don't
necessarily need to do that.
And so, and this, this is important because it means as a programmer, you may be giving someone
something they don't need and then you're kind of stuck needing to continue to do that or you've
wasted their time.
So if I give, I'm going to use direct fem as an example, you draw it up, I've got female clients who
do not want bigger quads or they just want, you know, maybe a little bit more quad development, but
they're not interested in growing the direct fem.
I don't need to give them a leg essential.
I don't need a trainer of direct fem.
And if I do, if I want to maintain that, I'm stuck having to do that forever.
Yes, what I noticed in a lot of the silver area programs is often they're adding stuff, they're not
really taking a whole lot away as someone gets more advanced, usually adding more on top of it.
And that's the way I would look at it as someone gets advanced, you just add new exercises.
You don't drop stuff out, you're just stuck adding more things.
And so if you don't need it in the first place, don't add it, but you're stuck having to continue to
do it.
Absolutely no, absolutely right.
I mean, we've, we've taken that journey on this podcast series and when we started out, we talked
about the aesthetic choices of, you know, the kind of right, the very beginning, the Eugene Sundial
type kind of approaches where they had a lot of deltoid development and pretty much no PEC
development.
And you can kind of then see the choices that people are making over time.
And you pointed out, you know, physique athletes and other people in different situations.
Everybody's got their own preferences and that those preferences are valid.
You know, I don't think it's appropriate to look at somebody's program and go, oh, you don't have
this in your program.
Therefore it's inferior to mine, which has more coverage.
It's not well, those are just potentially aesthetic choices.
It's like everybody can make their own choices about what they want to achieve.
You know, there's definitely stuff missing in my programs from some people's point of view, from my
own training, and from other people's point of view.
But that's my choice because I don't want certain things in my program.
So ultimately, I think you've got to start with a list of things that you want to train, not the
list of things that somebody else thinks you should train.
Now, I'm not saying that other people don't have important input and might have recommendations and
they might know that things might help you.
Or if that, I mean, I'm thinking about athletic situations.
I mean, like an athletic coach might say, well, if you train this muscle, then that will help you
with the sport.
And you weren't planning on training that muscle quite so much.
You know, a good example would be glutes and sprinters.
It's like no, no, no, no, you really do need to train that muscle.
It's going to help you a lot.
And they're like, I don't want to train hip thrusts.
I'm like, well, it's probably the single exercise I would recommend for a sprinter.
So, you know, I think again, it's not that other people don't have valuable input, it's just that
it's your list, not somebody else's list.
And maybe a couple of years ago, Dale, when we'd have been talking about a lot of this stuff and I
was writing programs and I, I've, I was hitting my head against this wall of exercises that, you
know, maybe I've used in earlier phases with clients.
And, you know, they're not, they're not priorities by any means.
But I don't want to lose results I've achieved in that particular muscle region.
And so I'd be sitting there trying to piece together this.
I mean, like, do I just give it to them once a week, but then I have to do 3 or 4 sets or like just
to maintain?
Or is it better for me just to do one set twice a week?
And hey, they're actually going to be making gains on that.
But like if I'm trying to structure, I've got a certain amount of volume I can do in a particular
session.
I just couldn't get to a point where I could justify giving someone four sets for an exercise that
wasn't even important to them.
It just didn't make sense to me.
And like if someone said, hey, it makes sense to them, by all means do it.
But it just emphasizes, hey, like even if something is a low priority, it's actually better off
doing it multiple times a week because you can actually do less on it overall.
Ultimately this is kind of why I am so positive about full body AB three times a week.
You know full body AB is just is 1 1/2 * a week.
It literally just about works.
You get, you get 1, you get 1 maintenance and one and one stimulus each week, basically phase each
week.
Obviously if you were doing that every other day, it would be, it would work as a stimulus situation
and that's.
The same one set.
Yeah, one set of an exercise in your AB kind of format.
And that is just gold because you end up in this scenario where you can do literally a whole rack of
exercises for a whole different load of regions, single sets, and do another different set of
exercises the next time you come in and just do that indefinitely.
And you get this enormous coverage.
So enormous coverage, which is so cool to do.
So if you got a reasonable level of, as you were saying, with advanced status, you got reasonable
training status, you know, full body AB single sets is a really nice way to keep everything that
you've got, everything that you've got basically, and make very, very slow progress over time.
And obviously you can Jack the volume up a little bit if you want to, you know, try and move more
quickly.
But honestly, I found as an older lifter, I find it's just a brilliant way to train because I'm not
going to gain very much at my age anyways.
Just hang on to everything I've got.
And a full body ABI mean this sound.
This might sound obvious to some people who may not beat others.
It can actually be the the INDB program can be very similar to each other like they.
Could or they could be completely different.
I mean, that's that's got wonderful nature.
You can absolutely go either way.
You can overlap or you can literally let your imagination run wild because you've got you're
basically doing A, you've got a situation where your A workout is growing from A to A and your B
workout is growing from B to B.
So you've not got any restrictions on you at all.
It's one of the most flexible.
You know the program.
Honestly, it's so cool.
Someone could say, hey, my maximum sets per session that I know I can really get much out of would
be say 18 sets.
And there might be 20 exercises I want to do.
And it could be as simple as being like, OK, there's going to be all of those exercises overlapping
A&B and there's one exercise or one or two exercises that are going to be unique and that's it.
Like you can.
Yeah.
I mean, if that's the problem that they need to solve, then probably AB solves that particular
unique problem.
It's a, it's almost a skeleton key for unlocking programming.
You can almost fix any problem that you've got with full body AB.
It's so versatile and usable and actually easy to easy to, as I say, programmer.
I mean, I didn't really, you know, until I until I really sort of got into programming, I didn't
realize how easy it was with the AB format and the fact that you can literally pick non overlapping
or overlapping exercises as you wish.
It is very very easy to easy to get right.
An interesting regular change over the last few years, and this has come from us as well, has been
we used to say full body was the hardest to program well.
That's what I was just thinking about as I was explaining that point.
And it's not really until I got into programming full body AB that I realized that it could be easy.
I was always trying to program and multiple sets and limited to four or five exercises per session.
And so I'd got, you know, 3 workouts per week of as close to overlapping as I possibly get.
And I was trying to make ABC work and it just did not work.
And my brain was like overheating trying to get the programming side to work because I'm, I'm
basically, you know, I, I think in terms of Physiology, I think in terms of how muscles work.
I think in terms of how the CNS controls the muscles and and and I don't really think in desert
programming.
I'm not a not a programming geek in that way.
So ultimately finding for what AAB and realizing it solves all of my programming problems was quite
an enjoyable.
Experience I used to tell people, if you don't know, if you don't understand bio mechanics, you
don't understand exercise selection, you're far better off just doing the same exercises if you work
out because you can't stuff that up.
You can't.
The frequency issue isn't there and ultimately that's what AV does.
You can't stuff it up.
Anything that you're using is getting enough volume, you just can't mess it up.
It's a sweet spot between not being able to stuff it up and yet having space to do almost anything
you want to do.
Yeah, it's a better that's.
Why that's why it's so good compared to just saying full body a great.
You know you can't get that wrong really three times a week.
But full body AB is is that but better not not saying it's always better if you want to make burgers
really quickly, then full body a is probably going to be your friend.
But you know, for once you've arrived at a certain destination, full body AB is, is fantastic.
I'm.
Trying to think if there's any other questions, commissions I commonly get on this topic and I feel
like we've covered most of them.
I'm sure there's going to be some that people are going to come at us with, but I think we've done
fairly good due diligence there.
Is there anything else you can think of worth covering or mentioning?
I think basically we've, we've covered all of the important stuff today and more besides.
Ultimately, I think really the only other physiological argument that people might want to tackle
is, is, is hypertrophy really only Moss a fibre specific?
And I'm, I'm not going to do that today because it's too much to, to dig into, but that's one I'm
starting to see people push back on.
It's totally natural that people will push back on ideas of that nature because they're just so
powerful.
I mean, ultimately it's kind of my major contribution apart from the force philosophy relationship
observation, it's the major contribution I've made to hypertrophy science really.
So it's not surprising that people are going to want to push back on that.
But other than that, I think we've, we've covered pretty much every complaint, A critique or you
know, kind of idea that I've seen floating around in this area.
I just think of one final one.
So we've mentioned or well, I mentioned that if I was programming, I'd try not to drop off
exercises.
I'd prefer to add on exercises as phase progress.
Now, that may not necessarily mean that one never gets rid of an exercise, because there could be an
exercise that one discovers that does the job of a former exercise.
But even better, if we're talking about using that exercise to bias a particular muscle or muscle
region.
Does that make sense?
Totally.
So I think that's a really good, a really good point.
So you know, if if maybe, if maybe somebody's been using, you know, AI don't know some kind of
pressing exercise as their triceps exercise and then they realized that dips actually do a better
job.
Then you would kind of migrate away from using that pressing exercise for the triceps and using the
dip instead.
I mean, you can, you can think of probably better examples than I can.
But that kind of idea I think is probably an interesting exception to the rule whereby you, you
don't, you know, sort of say, well, I'm, I'm just going to abandon the exercise because I'm
abandoning the exercise.
You you switch it for something that is better.
You know, I think that that that makes sense.
Yeah.
So again, you know, we've said the point that start with, I think I maybe said to start with all the
exercises you want.
And maybe you more correctly said start by identifying all the regions you want to train.
That would be the best way of going about it because it may be that you discover actually I was
using this exercise for Bracio Gradialis.
And in fact, here's a better exercise I've identified.
And in my training group that tends to be the way my programming works where I'd say 80% of
exercises stay the same across each phase.
And then maybe even more than that, maybe 8590% even.
And then there'll be a couple of exercises that change, usually because I've identified or actually
think this is slightly better at what I was using this other exercise for.
No, totally makes sense.
Okay, that's it, That's up on the topic.
Thank you guys for joining us.
As always, please like, subscribe, share all the good stuff and join us again next week for another
episode.