Episode: 034 Voluntary activation deficit: exercise selection, muscle mass, and form
URL: https://open.spotify.com/episode/4NPg6ZEU5AZDdyV2efymZZ
Published: 2026-01-11
================================================================================

Hello, good morning, good evening, wherever you are.
Thank you for joining us for another episode of Hypertrophy Past and Present in 2026, our second
episode for the year.
So thank you everyone for joining us for another year.
Well, Hypertrophy Past and Present, we are talking about a golden era plan today.
So we've, for you guys who don't know that we do this, we've started contrasting plans that we saw
from the silver era and then plans we saw in the golden era.
So before and after anabolics were being widely used in bodybuilding.
And we're using it as a bit of a way to I guess assess some of the changes we see feed into
bodybuilding and hypertrophy training after the influence of anabolics is introduced.
And we're, we're speculating a little bit here.
Obviously this is sort of us looking, you know, applying a lens, looking backwards in time and
seeing and asking a question maybe why did some of these changes occur?
But it's certainly been an interesting thought experiment so far.
And this is the, I think the third plan, maybe third or fourth plan we've looked at from the post
anabolic era and today.
This is an interesting plan because it's actually the first Mr. Olympia winner.
So this plan we're looking at is from the 60s and we're gonna look at a plan that supposedly Larry
Scott followed.
Now, Larry Scott was the first Olympia winner in 1965 and he won and 1964.
He won again in 1965.
So he won the first two years and obviously he would have been enhanced when he was winning these
competitions.
And this plan was from about that time.
So maybe a little bit before he was winning the Olympia, but he was certainly winning competitions
at this point in time.
And as the story goes, he was given this plan by Vince Gronda.
Now, we've not talked about Vince on this show before.
And at some point we will, I'm sure, cover one of Vince's plans directly, not one that he's
indirectly given to someone else.
But Vince.
I don't know if I've told you this, Chris, but Vince is one of the people I get asked about the
most.
I get so many requests for us to cover Vince's plans, Vince and and Dorian.
So we will cover both of their plans at some point in the future, I assure you.
So this is Larry Scott's plan.
Again, this is just, you know, supposedly the plan he was following.
I don't know how long he was following it for, but in the early 60s he was apparently following this
plan.
Now it was full body and it was the same workout repeated 3 times per week.
So again, obviously, you know, up until the golden era, it is most common for people to repeat full
body programs.
A, a, a, you know, three times per week.
We did see that start to shift particularly sort of in their more kind of 70s.
And so this is I guess on that sort of cusp before we start to see some of these splits emerge.
So we have a, what I'll do actually is I'm gonna start with the exercise selection and then I'm
gonna tell you how it is performed because it was performed in a relatively unique way.
And that will, I guess, be an interesting conversation in and of itself.
So the excise selection, we start with bench press to neck.
So a wide bench press.
I guess what some people call, I think they call it a guillotine press.
Is that what you call it, Chris?
You're looking at me like you don't know.
OK.
I think some people call it a guillotine press or just a wide grip bench.
And then we move from that into a barbell squat and then go into a car phrase and then behind the
neck barbell press and then a front pull down.
I'm sure we'll be happy to see we've got a a pull down here.
Now.
This was called front pull down.
I don't believe they mean frontal plan.
I'm assuming that they mean just in in front of the neck.
So probably more.
I guess scapular plan would be my guess here, but I'm not entirely sure.
And then we go into a line, a barbell triceps extension, a preacher bench curl, biceps curl, which I
don't think we've seen that before.
This might be the first time we've seen this exercise listed.
And then we conclude with a bent leg knee raise.
So it's a relatively condensed workout in terms of exerci number of exercises.
However, it's not short in terms of total number of sets.
So each exercise by the bent leg knee range, which is done for one single set of 100 repetitions
each other exercise was done for six sets and for six to eight repetitions.
There was one or two exercises where the repetitions changed a little bit.
Carved raises went a little bit higher, but generally they were done for six sets or 6 to 8
repetitions.
Now this bit's important and I think This is why people are so interested in Gronda's work, is they
were done with short rest periods.
So this workout, I couldn't find exactly how long the rest periods were, but the instructions were
to use the same weights for all sets and repetitions and if you can complete all of them, then you
add load next workout.
So obviously doing 6 sets or six stage repetitions where and and doing shorter rest periods as
Grenda was known for doing, I would be assuming that we those first few sets would be at least a few
repetitions in reserve.
So a different plan to what we've looked at so far.
Chris, what are your thoughts so far and all of that?
Yeah, so there's a couple of interesting things to say here.
I mean, obviously, you know, nobody's going to be surprised by what I'm going to say about exercise
selection.
I mean, you know, there's, there's some pretty big gaps in here as regards to, you know, maximizing
muscle growth across the whole body.
But there's two interesting things that I think we can say that I that I don't often say.
Firstly, I think that it's interesting to see how this golden era kind of plan is doing something to
try and essentially limit the potential damage to the tendons that might occur with the combination
of using anabolics and strength training simultaneously.
Because that's that's the issue when you've got kind of an anabolic sort of state in the system as a
result of exogenous pharmaceuticals, what you end up with is the inability to repair the tendon
properly after the damage that can be caused by strength training exercise.
So if we have got this kind of fatigue being used to manage that problem, essentially they're using
multiple sets and short rest periods.
Essentially that means that you're doing fewer repetitions with a lighter load than you would do if
you were kind of leaving, you know, long rest periods and training to failure and what have you
essentially managing the exposure of the tendon to the potential damage that could occur.
Now, I think there are better ways of doing it.
You know, I think we can use blood flow restriction and potentially other, you know, kind of ideas
around that sort of approach.
But ultimately fatigue is a very simple way of doing it if you've got no equipment and no kind of,
you know, sort of, you know, knowledge around BFR, which obviously would have been the case back
then.
So that's the first thing that I think is interesting.
The second thing is this, this idea of doing super high repetition sets.
So I've got this.
I'm not actually sure what a bent leg knee raise is.
I think you'd probably have to describe that to me.
Look, I'm assuming what that exercise is would be lying on a a bench, like an inclined bench with
your head at the top and then doing like reverse crunch.
I'm assuming that that's what they mean by this.
So it's it's a hip flexor exercise.
So it could be done like with a pull up bar.
Obviously that's how people usually do it today, hanging for like a a dead hang and then pulling
their their knees up towards their midline or a bit higher.
But I'm assuming that this is done on the benches.
That's what I normally see in the photos of these magazines.
OK.
In which case there are two interesting things to say about this and not just one.
So the thing I was going to say was that with really high repetition sets, what a lot of people
don't realize if they don't have the basic kind of Physiology behind them is that once you go to a
Rep range higher than around about sort of, you know, if we're thinking about percentages of warmer
at Max, approximately 30% of warmer at Max, you know, and it depends on the exercise and the muscle
group that you're training, what that corresponds to in terms of Rep range.
But 100 to 150 is absolutely, you know, kind of off the top end of that.
So it's definitely lighter than 30% of warmer Max.
Once you're past 30% of our Max, you're not going to stimulate any hypertrophy.
Now, the reason for that is fascinating.
And a lot of people, I'd say the vast majority of people who are kind of influencers in this space
don't know about this thing.
Essentially, in order to accumulate metabolites inside a muscle, you need to actually create
vascular occlusion.
Now I'll come on to how blood flow occlusion, blood flow restriction works in this context in a
minute.
But basically when we have a, a muscle that is contracting and it's producing whole muscle force,
higher than around about 30% of moment Max, then essentially the veins get squeezed closed during a
muscular contraction.
So isometric or concentric contraction, you're closing the muscle, it closes the veins.
Now essentially that means that you're essentially trapping the blood inside the muscle.
So it starts to create that kind of muscle pump that people talk about to a degree.
I mean, there's a bit more involved in muscle pump, but that's the starting point.
Now the metabolites then can't leave the muscle.
They're trapped inside the muscle because the blood is what takes the metabolites out of the muscle.
So if you're like using a heavier load than 30% of 1 Max, then you're essentially trapping the blood
and muscle, trapping the metabolites.
You're going to get metabolite relative T mechanisms.
If on the other hand, you use a lighter load than that, then even when you do a concentric and
isometric contraction, you're actually squeezing the muscle, you're not closing the veins.
What's going to happen is you're just going to squirt the blood out of the muscle and it's going to
take all the metabolites with it so you don't get metabolite related fatigue.
So there's these two, There's basically an inflection point.
It's really, really critical to understand how the fatigue mechanisms are working.
So just quickly there, I know you've defined this in the past, but when we're talking about fatigue,
obviously a lot of people will hear fatigue and that'll have a negative connotation.
And I think all fatigue is bad, but ultimately when they're talking.
Fatigue mostly because of me.
I mean, prior to me coming along, everybody thought fatigue was good and it actually stimulated
hypertrophy.
That management at least changed changed the conversation.
In that regard, yeah.
And that's I, I think the, the fundamental mistake people are making here is not understanding what
fatigue is, right?
And that's why people think it's good to be bad.
Yeah, exactly.
It's just an outcome.
It's an observation.
It's what happening underneath the surface that tells you whether it's good or bad.
Yeah, exactly.
So all that's happening is fatigue is telling you that there's reduction in performance.
Yeah, correct.
And so you're saying, hey, the thing that's causing the reduction in performance here in this in in
a normal set of say 20 repetitions is just build up in metabolites.
That's OK.
Mostly.
Mostly, yeah.
And it actually.
Yes, there's other mechanisms as well, sure.
Totally.
But ultimately metabolites are the the bigger player and ultimately what that means is that we don't
have much of a negative effect on either recruitment or single fibre tension.
And as a result the presence of the metabolites is is completely innocuous.
It doesn't cause us any problems and it facilitates us slowing down the movement speed and
ultimately getting to a point where we can produce high levels of recruitment at the same time as
high levels of mechanical tension.
So you get a hypertrophy stimulus, so.
The fatigue is necessary to get to that stimulating part of the set if.
If you're not going to use a fibre Max or heavier, yeah, you need some of that metabolite related
fatigue in order to get to the point where you can stimulate hypertrophy.
Yeah, totally true.
So the problem with light loads are off the end of that thirty, we tend to call them very light
loads, but that's just terminology.
So if you go lighter than 30% of more, I'm actually now not able to squeeze the veins closed.
You can't create the top light related T.
The only types of fatigue now that you are going to generate are going to be types of fatigue that
either reduce recruitment or that reduce mechanical tension.
You're either going to have calcium iolated T mechanisms in the muscle virus or you're going to have
super spinal or spinal CNFT mechanisms in the central nervous system and they're going to produce a
reduced level of recruitment.
So essentially once you go off that kind of sort of limit of Rep range and you know, again, it can
be any number really depending on the muscle and the exercise.
But you know, kind of a roundabout sort of, you know, maybe 30 plus repetition sets, you're going to
find that you not actually stimulating hypertrophy.
And that is really interesting that we're seeing that here in the golden era in a situation where
we're expecting that people are using anabolics because ultimately we've divorced this connection
between what we're doing in training and what we're getting as an output.
Because if your anabolics are automatically creating muscle growth while you're asleep and not even
in the gym, then ultimately, you know, you're not necessarily going to know that an exercise isn't
working properly.
And that's really, really cool to see that here, just from a historical perspective, really cool to
see that here, you know, where we've kind of lost the ability to know that what we're doing is
working.
When I look at this plan, one thing I find interesting is this is kind of kind of the first
integration we see moving away from the traditional way the Silver Ariel plans were done.
And so we've still got most of it there.
We've still got the full body, We still got the a, a, a, We've still got a similar exercise
selection.
We've got in some way similar repetitions.
Yes, we've got this one exercise which is being done for over 100 repetitions, but everything else
is 6 to 8 thereabouts.
So looking at it, it's like, oh, this is, this is most of what we expect to see.
But then we start to see a couple of things introduce themselves.
And like you said, you know, the the highest set number, the shorter rest periods.
Is that potentially to do with injury prevention?
Possibly, we don't know.
But it's just interesting to see how things are starting to shift.
And this is only, I mean, what are we talking maybe five years?
It's within the decade of anabolics being used.
And so within only a few years, we're starting to see some of these shifts start to occur.
But equally, as you say, it's not a horrible program.
I mean, I really like this wide grip bench combined with wide grip overhead press.
I mean that's a, if you're looking for two pressing variations that are going to give you some
really good coverage across the upper body pressing musculature, that's a really nice combo.
You know, and again, I like the fact that we've got a pull down which, you know, probably a scapular
plane.
So it's not amazing.
You know, it's probably a kind of a bit of a mix of some upper and some lower lats, but you know,
OK, not a problem.
At least we've got something in there that's training the lat, which is one of my major criticisms
about, you know, kind of the silver here of routines, you know, and then, OK, so we've got some
direct triceps work.
We've got some direct biceps work, but again, you know, nothing really on the hamstrings.
But then again, that is a feature of Silver era programs.
We don't tend to see, you know, much hamstrings kind of work being done in those situations.
And of course, you know, obviously squats we're getting, you know, kind of and calf raises we're
getting, you know, decent coverage for quads, calves, maybe to a certain extent glutes as well.
So yeah, I mean, it's it's, it's it's you could do a lot worse.
I mean, we keep saying this every time we look at the Silver era routine, and the same thing applies
here, really, apart from the kind of strangeness regarding sets and reps, you know, you could do
worse than this program.
You really could.
Yeah, I mean, if you drop those sets down, if you halved those sets.
Yes, if you did three sets of eight, this would not be a horrible program at all.
And then what would we?
I mean, I like the bench pressing neck.
Obviously Gronda, my understanding is Gronda basically didn't allow standard bench pressing in his
gym.
Like his whole thing was he didn't like benches, I don't think a whole lot at all.
But he did do this sort of more guillotine style, which is not a bad variation, is it?
I mean, obviously taking that that wider grip, he's not.
I guess it would be better if he was potentially adding in something else.
I was going to get maybe a little bit more UER chest and there's not really anything else here
that's going to do that, but it's still a fine.
I guess it does reduce a little bit more of the triceps and so we're getting a little bit more chess
anyway.
But, you know, I look at a plan like this and I think it's good for I, I would say this exercise
selection is like relatively good for maybe a beginner.
Yeah.
Like someone who's like, hey, I just want to kind of hit as much as I can.
I don't want to get too sort of bogged down in, you know, a whole lot of different exercise variety.
I'm not sort of looking at competing.
I'm, you know, I don't want to maximally develop everything I can bit to see that an Olympia
competitor or or winner was using this.
Like, that's a little bit surprising, don't you think?
Yeah.
I mean, I think that's that's kind of where the anabolics comes in, isn't it?
I mean, that's where we kind of say, you know, ultimately anabolics make everything grow and you can
kind of, I mean, that's, that's one of the things that I think is, is probably the biggest sort of
thing that differentiates, you know, competitors who are using anabolics from, from, from the
natural lifters.
I mean, a lot of people go, oh, well, the anabolic users can, they can do loads of more volume and
they can recover and all that nonsense.
I mean, there probably is a little bit of a difference in recovery, but I don't think it's big as
people think it is.
The real thing is that, you know, people using antibiotics can literally do any silly exercise as
they like and leave gaping holes in their routines regarding certain muscle groups and those muscle
groups will still grow.
I mean, This is why you kind of got, you know, kind of people arguing, oh, no, no, no, I don't need
to do all these exercise.
You know, I can just do, you know, I don't know what sort of silly things they say, but you know,
you might have people saying, oh, I could just do squat, bench, deadlift and I'll grow the same as a
bodybuilder will do.
I'm like.
You know, this is really topical what you're saying there because plans like this, and you said a
moment ago, look, it's not a bad plan and it's not, it's not awful.
It could be way worse.
And you look at this and it's like, well, you know, there's decent chest, decent shoulders, decent
quads.
You're not getting direct fem unless you can that bent leg knee raise that he's doing, you know,
arms, OK, we've got some arms, direct arms work in there, got some lap work.
But we're not maximizing what we can achieve by any means, right?
And there's a lot of people who are pushing plans like this.
And again, not to say that these are bad plans.
And I use plans like.
These I was gonna say honest, honestly, I could, I could kind of take that loss, to be honest.
I mean this, this if, if this was the worst that we were seeing, I'd be actually pretty happy.
With that, absolutely.
I mean, as an A, a, a plan, this is great.
Again, for someone who doesn't want to maximize every single thing that they can, who just wanted to
build a decent physique, I think this is phenomenal.
Yeah.
But where the conversation is headed is this is all that one needs to maximally develop.
Yeah, because, you know, you look at something like a behind the neck press and the argument goes,
well, you're going to get anterior delta, you get middle delta, get some trap work in there.
This is great.
That's all you need.
You look at the bench press to neck, you're getting upper chest, you're getting middle chest and a
little bit of lower chest.
OK, great, that's all you need.
And, you know, we would look at a plan like this and say, yeah, someone's going to build a good
physique with this, but can you maximally develop every muscle region using just one exercise for
that whole muscle group?
That's the problem, and I think ultimately that's what I wanted to talk about today under the kind
of, well, through the lens of three errors that I'm seeing generally in the social media today.
I mean, we were chatting about this before the podcast and I was saying, look, there's these three
things that I keep seeing, and you were telling me you've seen them as well.
Essentially, there are people arguing about excise selection, which is kind of what we've just been
talking about.
They're saying basically that, you know, if you're doing an exercise that involves a muscle group,
then it automatically, you know, means that you're, you know, training that muscle group to a
maximum extent.
Similarly, you've got people who don't really understand what happens when you change the total
amount of muscle mass.
That you're, you know, using so like, go from a squat to an extension.
What's actually different there and why is it different?
And then, you know, we've also got situations where people are arguing a lot about exactly how to
perform an exercise and whether there's, you know, specific tempo or, you know, kind of form that
has to be used and these three things.
What I think most people don't realise is that all of these three arguments, these three discussions
that are taking place are actually, you know, subservient to 1 fundamental observation in sports
science that most people are just completely ignoring.
And that's something that we've already covered in great detail.
And I was actually just looking back to see what episode number it was.
It's #30 so if you haven't come across what a voluntary activation deficit is, then please go back
and listen to episode #30 because we did a really, really good, long, detailed discussion of exactly
what's going on with voluntary activation deficits.
But today I just want to show how voluntary activation deficits explain or at least provide very
important context to each of these three separate arguments.
And we can, you know, if we want to, we can start with the exercise selection one, because that was
the one we were, we were just talking about.
But very briefly, before we kind of go through each of these three areas, let me just explain what
the voluntary activation deficit is in brief, because as I say, we did a full episode on this
previously.
So when we say voluntary activation deficit, it is a measurement.
So again, like fatigue is a measurement, strength is a measurement, this is a measurement.
So we're taking a measurement and showing that when somebody performs a maximum effort contraction,
often in a very controlled environment to minimize, you know, the issues associated with stability
and muscle mass and that kind of thing.
So when it does a maximum effort contraction, then what we can do is we can superimpose electrical
stimulation on that to see if there are any muscle fibers that are not being activated.
OK.
So essentially we're going to get an idea of how much more force, or in the case of a dynamometer
torque somebody could generate if they were able to fully activate the entirety of their muscle to
the, you know, theoretical maximum extent.
And generally speaking, when we do these tests, again, in the controlled environments in which
they're being formed, we get kind of large muscle groups like the quads showing deficits of maybe
around 20%.
So they're what we call hitting a voluntary activation level of 80%.
And that deficit is, you know, essentially 20%.
So that's force production.
And essentially what that implies is there's a large chunk of muscle fibres that are simply not
capable of being activated under maximum voluntary effort conditions, which we could activate
further that if we're, you know, applying an electrical stimulus, which is what's done in these
tests.
So that's what a voluntary activation deficit test is.
Now, it's not the same thing as muscle activation.
It's got nothing to do with electromyography.
So when people come along and say, oh, well, you know, you're talking about muscle activation and
that's electromyography and that's not related to hypertrophy.
I'm like, no, we're not talking about that.
It sounds similar, similar terminology, but it's actually completely unrelated.
There is no electromyography involved in the making of a voluntary activation deficit test.
So it's literally forced comparisons.
So it's very, very, very secure in terms of how we are interpreting this information.
So essentially what we're saying is that even when you are producing a maximum effort, now this
could be in a test like in a dynamometer, or you could be in muscular failure when you're reaching
the end of a strengthening set, it doesn't really matter.
In fact, the muscular failure will actually involve an even bigger voluntary activation deficit for
superspinal fatigue reasons.
But ultimately, essentially maximum effort, you're not getting every single muscle fiber activated
in the muscle.
And this is ultimately the key that helps us understand these three separate conversations that are
taking place at the moment regarding exercise selection, the amount of muscle mass that's involved
in exercise, which is kind of an excise selection issue, but it's a very specific example of 1.
And then thirdly, this idea around form and coordination.
So essentially, if we start with exercise selection, now imagine you've got 2 exercises that are
essentially very similar in terms of like, for example, the total muscle mass being used, but
they're actually involved potentially different either directions.
So maybe you're, you know, moving the shoulder in a slightly different direction.
Maybe you're working a different plane of motion, or alternatively, maybe the resistance profile is
different, so you're producing maximum effort at one end of the joint angle range of motion, or
alternatively the opposite end of the joint angle range of motion.
You could imagine, say, for example, a biceps curl, where maybe in one exile variation you've got
maximum effort with the elbow extended, and the other example you've got maximum effort when the
elbow is flexed.
I mean, these are kind of ways that you can manipulate exercises to kind of create different
effects.
Now, if we understand that neuro mechanical matching essentially tries to get us to send the
activation to whichever muscles have the best leverage, then what's going to happen is you're going
to first of all start sending activation to those muscle muscle regions that have the best leverage
and you're going to carry on, you know, working your way up the motor unit pool.
Now, ultimately, because we have a voluntary activation deficit, you're going to stop before you get
to the maximum possible limit that you could get to theoretically.
Essentially, you're going to get to a level at which you have to stop early.
Now, that happens in the case of, you know, strengthening and also in the case of any other type of
exercise because we reach our maximum tolerable perceptions of effort.
But ultimately we're going to find that we get to a level of activation.
We've activated a certain number of muscle virus and we cannot now activate the remaining however
many percent.
In the case of big muscle groups, maybe it's like, you know, up to 20%.
In the case of smaller ones, it's probably more than like 2 to 5%.
But the point is there are muscle fibers that are not being activated.
Now essentially in one of the XR variations, we've proceeded by sending activation to 1.
Let's say for example, in the elbow flexors, we've started with a extended elbow position.
We're starting out sending most of the activation towards the bisect brachy.
You're going to work your way through most of the bisect brachy muscle fibers and then you're going
to move on to other muscle fibers in other parts of the elbow flex complex that can contribute.
But you're going to stop before you hit the maximum possible level of activation of those muscle
fibers.
So you're leaving behind some muscle fibers in the brachy, radialis, whatever that aren't actually
being activated.
So there are fibers there that are not being activated.
Now, that's because the motor units are not being recruited.
So don't get distracted by people saying oh, well, you know, muscle fibers and motor units.
That was not the same thing.
Well, in this context, it is.
When we then look at the opposite example, we're producing peak force, say for example, in a flex
position, Then we start off sending all the activation to the brachoradialis.
We fill that up and then we move to another muscle like the Bisox brachy and the fibers that can
contribute.
And again, we stop before we reach the maximum level.
So the fibers that are not being used now are not the ones from the brachoradialis.
The ones that are not being used are from Bisox brachy.
So essentially what we can see is that if you choose these two different exercises, you just
essentially leave untrained fibers from different parts of the elbow flex complex depending on which
exercise variation you use.
And that's just a resistance profile example.
You can do the same thing with movement direction or plane of motion examples.
Exactly the same idea.
So let's move slowly here.
Let's leave no stone unturned because this is a topic that gets very confused online.
So let's say you are doing the example exercise you've just given.
You're doing a bicep curl and you're doing one that is harder.
In that stretch position, you're going to be using more biceps.
Now why does the body not or the brain not use 100% of the available biceps brachy Modi units before
using brachialis brachy radialis?
Like why would we be in a situation where we're getting say maybe 8590% activation devices brachy,
we're getting still relatively high activation in brachialis brachy radialis.
Why are we not getting, why are we not sending all central motor command to that one muscle that has
better leverage in that movement?
It's entirely possible that that does happen, but it probably doesn't because generally speaking you
are going to have some motor units in the bracket radialis that have better leverage than the motor
units in the bracket that have worst leverage.
Yeah.
So ultimately what we're looking at is, is let's say you can use 100 money.
Obviously this is just an arbitrary number.
Say you're you're going to use 100 motor units to do that exercise.
You're going to use some motor units in order that have the best leverage to do that that function.
Yeah.
I mean, basically you can think of it as a Venn diagram.
So essentially there will be regions of the each of the elbow flexors and the brain kind of thinks
in terms of motor units rather than muscle regions and muscles.
But ultimately what it will do is it will go, oh, this area here has amazing leverage for the task
I'm about to perform and the reason, the range of motion I'm in.
And then it'll go there and it'll then work on Henman size principle.
So people get really, really upset and confused and angry about how Henman size principle interacts
with the principle of neurochemical matching principle.
Neurochemical matching tells you where to go to start with, and Henman size principle then tells you
what to do when you get there.
So essentially Henerman size principle is going to work once you arrive in the area of the muscle or
the region or the, or the specific muscle, depending on how it's constructed and how uniform it is.
It's very uniform.
Then it's just going to treat it as a whole thing.
So ultimately it's going to go to the area that it wants to use for the movement, and then it's
going to follow Henneman size principle once it gets there.
So essentially because some people go, oh, you don't need neural mechanical matching, you'd use
Henneman size principle.
And I'm like, really?
So if I'm like, I want to walk across the room, you're going to start using muscle fibers in my
deltoid because they're smaller than muscle fibers.
Yeah, there's it's like they're talking nonsense.
Their brain has.
To start to a point, you.
Need a starting point of location 1st and that has to follow leverage because otherwise, if it
doesn't have leverage, this is like the people who anyway get on to the end of the day.
But you have to start with leverage because that's the only thing that guarantees you're going to be
able to do the movement that you want to do.
And then after that you follow Hanneman, Sarge Mantle.
But yes, in answer to your question, theoretically, if every single motor unit and muscle fibre in
the bices Brachy had better leverage than every single motor unit muscle fibre in the Brachy
radialis.
And yeah, it would, what would happen is you would end up with the entirety of the bices brachy
being activated before any of the muscle fibre in the Brachy radialis.
But that's not going to happen.
You are going to have some mix and match.
So it's going to kind of use some of the fibres in or some of the motor units in the Brachy radialis
and you're just going to move forward.
But on on balance, you're going to use, you know, the muscle fibres and motor units in the in the
bicyrachy faster, more of them going to occur earlier.
And you're going to end up maxing that out pretty much with that exercise that involves peak forces
or peak efforts in the extended elbow stretch position.
And then, as I say, you're going to move on to the remaining ones that you can activate in the
Brachyridialis.
And then you're just going to have to cap out at a certain point because you maximum tolerable
perception of efforts not going to allow you to send anymore or create any more central Moto con to
send to that that area of the body.
And that's the point when you're going to leave those Mosfire was untrained inside the
Brachyridialis.
So just keep saying this and people just keep denying it with giving 0 explanation.
I mean this is kind of where we are at the moment on social media is I, I explain exactly how this
is working.
I show them physiologically and then people just post like a one line comment saying that's not how
it works.
Then they walk away and it's like you're giving no explanation of why you think that.
You're not giving any details, you're not giving any mechanistic explanation.
There's no Physiology in what you're saying.
You know, if people are following you, that's kind of on them at this point.
Really.
That's not, that doesn't sound like a me problem.
That sounds like a them problem.
Yeah, generally people online are just shouting very loudly that you're wrong, and then offering
very little by way of explanation as to why.
And people believe those people.
I think that that's a them problem.
That's not a me.
Problem, yes, but if someone shouts loud enough at a certain point, it does become quite compelling
to some people.
Now, one argument on this topic that I've seen several times is that, well, hang on, if you do
multiple sets, then each time you do a set you will be using different Modi units.
And so just do the same exercise, do multiple sets of it.
And in the first set you might get a little bit more of the biases back in the next set, you might
get a little bit more dracialis.
And if you just do enough sets and you're kind of getting everything.
Has anybody proposed A mechanism for how that should happen?
Because that's impossible.
That's impossible.
So what's going to happen is that if you do exactly the same movement repeated times, then what's
going to happen is that you get the same motion that's being used.
That's that's what's going to happen, except as.
CNST then you end up getting less of you're.
Going to get total, yeah, you're going to get less total Motene.
It's being recruited.
You're going to lose even more of your, in this case Brachyidialis ones in that stretch position
exercise that you're doing.
So you're going to get make it even more focused on the kind of muscle group that you're originally
trying to target.
Really in a, in a way, not because it's doing anything positive, but just because you're losing
stuff, you know, in in that top end of the Motene pool.
Yeah.
I mean, ultimately the only way that argument would make sense would be would not even make sense.
But that argument is predicated on.
As one gets more fatigued, they're essentially using more mode units, and that's.
That's, that's again going back to this old idea that fatigue was somehow involved.
I mean, like, I can go back and I can pick out, I mean, they tried to memory all this stuff, but I
can go back and I can get reviews written by Hypertroof researchers that literally say that fatigue
increases mode and recruitment.
I'm like, that is a physiological impossibility.
I would be ashamed to.
I mean, I probably did write something that's silly at some point in my life, but I'd be ashamed if
if I if I wrote that these days.
You know, I mean, it's just such a absolutely ludicrous idea.
You know, the brain is in control of voting equipment, not, not the local fatigue, you know,
mechanisms that are happening.
OK.
So I guess so far that explains kind of why we've made the point in the past.
It would make more sense to do, say, one set of two different exercises, like the two curl
variations you just gave there, as opposed to doing 2 sets of 1.
Yeah, totally.
So that, I mean, that's kind of like the basic idea of changing exercises, you know, within the
parameters of of using the same kind of total amount of muscle mass like we were describing with a
biceps curve with different points of peak effort in the range of motion.
You can also kind of look at a different problem, which is what happens if we go from LX size that
has a very small amount of muscle mass like a single leg knee extension and compare what's happening
say for example in a in a back squat like.
Can we do that in the reverse order?
Because I've this is again, something that's that's getting a lot of air time at the moment.
And I have seen people arguing that a squat is going to be better than a leg extension.
No one could build good legs doing a leg extension, but doing squats you can build great quads and
also seen the same argument with delts.
And in fact if you're doing an overhead press it's a waste of time doing a lateral raise.
So both of these examples but one is starting with more muscle mass and then saying that using
excise that has less muscle mass is going to be useless.
I think this is people mistaking perceptions of effort for, you know, they're using a perception of
effort as a proxy for as a.
Proxy for how effective that?
Exercise is so how effective an exercise is.
So ultimately, but what we know from and like you can start with the bilateral force deficit
observation, which is where you do, you know, 2 exercises.
Sorry, you do.
Well, yeah, you do 2 exercises.
You do one exercise with basically a single limb variation and the same again with A2 limb
variation.
So maybe you're doing biceps curls with two arms or maybe you're doing biceps curls with, with just
one arm.
Now what you'll notice is that you can lift more than 50% of your two arm biceps curl weight with
one arm.
And the reason for that actually has been studied and it is because you can achieve a high level of
voluntary activation, voting, recruitment when you're using one arm compared to when you're using
both arms at the same time.
This is because when you have more muscle mass operating simultaneously, the brain is sending
multiple central mode commands to different places and as a result, it can't get to the same level
of central mode command that it would be able to if you're only sending central mode command to a
single place.
We've got a whole load of fatigue literature that does exactly the same thing, showing that the more
muscle mass you are evolving in an exercise, the smaller the level of local peripheral fatigue you
can reach at muscular failure.
So you reach failure, but you haven't got to a very high level of most local muscular fatigue.
And it's simply because you're not getting to a very high level of motin in recruitment.
You're not activating the fast reach fibres that are generally responsible for generating the ton of
metabolites.
So it, it, it all fits together in terms of showing us that the more total muscle mass you're using,
the lower the level of recruitment is going to be in anyone muscle that you are interested in.
So it's a physiological logical impossibility to get to the same level of voting improvement in a
squat or an overhead press compared to a new extension or a lateral raise.
It just is never going to happen.
It can't do.
And literally every time you send me a screenshot of people arguing about this, they're literally
just one liners saying no, they're the same thing.
I'm like, OK, tell me how that's possible.
Then tell me how that's possible.
Don't just yell at me telling me that you think it's not possible.
It's 100% not true.
Whatever you want to use on social media to make yourself look good, tell me why it's happening or
why you think it's happening.
Because I'm really, really clear when I look at the literature, it's not happening.
I'm trying to play devil's advocate and thinking, thinking to myself, how could one argue that one
of these exercises that uses all this extra musculature like a squat will be superior for quad
development than an isolated knee extension?
And beyond what you said there, that proxy of blood feels hard.
Therefore it works.
I mean to, to be generous, I would say I think some of this is purely anecdotal in the sense that
plenty of people in the silver area only did squats because they didn't have leg extensions.
And so we can certainly look at it and say, well, of course people built quads just doing squats.
And who has access to just a leg extension and not a barbell?
No one, hardly anyone.
So we don't have as many anecdotes of people who build great quads just using a leg extension as we
do using a squat.
But that's not an A physiological argument or explanation as to why the leg extension would be
inferior.
And I can't even.
I can't even come up with a possible argument as to why one would make that sort of suggestion.
No, which is why I think people retreat to anecdotes, because they don't have a model.
They don't have a physiological explanation for how this is working, or might work, or could work,
or is supposed to work.
I mean, so for me this is really open and shut.
It's like bilateral force deficit.
You've got the fatigue literature, as I say, and I've done a summary post of all of those studies so
people can look at that and just those two things together make it really clear that you can't
activate.
And it, it's logical as well.
I mean, you've got centimeter command building up, doing different things.
You're not going to be able to get to the same level of centimeter command in a single place as you
would do with a, you know, a small muscle mass exercise.
So really it comes down to, you know, we've got voluntary activation deficits going on, stopping us
getting to maximum levels of recruitment and as a result that voluntary activate.
Well, just to be clear, the voluntary activation deficit is happening because we are generating
central motor command.
When we get to our maximum tolerable section of effort associated with the maximum level of central
motor command, we can't get any further.
We're using that centrometer command to do multiple things in the case of a large muscle mass
exercise.
We're only using that centrometer command at maximum tolerable section of effort to do one thing in
the case of a small muscle mass exercise.
So ultimately the small mass mass exercise is always going to be better for maxing out a specific
region of the body.
So let me ask you this.
People talk about redundancy a lot and I'll be honest, I there's terms that they just don't sit
well.
I, I don't personally like it when people talk about redundancy in a program.
I feel like that's quite reductionistic.
But nonetheless, if when people talk about redundancy, they're essentially claiming that adding in
another exercise is not giving us anything new.
Single best example of redundancy in a train in a training program is doing more than one set for an
exercise.
That's so I'm assuming that anybody who wants to argue about redundancy is going to be doing single
set protocols.
If they're not, then they are basically what we would say hoist by their own petard.
Did you just come up with that then about the redundancy multi sets?
It just occurred to me as you were talking before, no.
Just just no.
It just occurred to me as you were saying.
OK, it's one of those ones where I hear you say it and like, damn you, damn it.
I wish I thought of that.
Anyway, the point I wanted to make is.
I used to have a former podcast Co host that used to say that every week.
So in the case of a lateral raise and the overhead press, we gave that example before you could
actually make the argument that if if one is starting with a multi joint exercise or the OR the
squat, I guess, and the second exercise that they're talking about adding in is a exercise that's
using less musculature.
And it's so in this case, the ladies tension or latrigase, ultimately my default that smaller that
exercise using less muscle is not like can't really be redundant.
Like it's never going to be redundant because it's always unless there's, you know, insane amounts
of fatigue mechanisms that have occurred in that previous set.
There's always going to be more modiant recruitment in that target muscle using that isolated
exercise.
But if we flipped it and someone started with, say, the latrice or the leg extension, you could
actually make a better argument for them doing the squat or the overhead press as those exercises
being redundant, couldn't you?
For the target muscle that you're describing, I mean that that's kind of where it gets weird because
that, and that's why I like programs that at least start with an understanding of what each exercise
is good at and where it's good at in different ranges of motion.
So if I was programming a lateral raise, then I would look at my overhead press variation.
I'd be like, well, maybe I'd do my overhead press variation more in the sagittal plane instead of in
the frontal plane.
And I start to focus more on other muscle groups that you know.
Because the overhead trace is not going to give you anything for the middle delt that you're not
getting with the.
Left you haven't already got.
Or I could just keep my wide, you know, grip and use the frontal plane.
But I could work in the overhead range of motion shoulder height, so which I actually find very.
Comfortable.
Yeah, top is, yeah, I get much more anterior delt in that top half of the range of motion.
So yeah, I mean like for me as an older lifter doing like a lateral raise for the for the middle
delt and then doing my wide grip overhead press in the upper part of the range of motion is just so
much kinder on my shoulders than, you know, kind of doing an overhead press starting much, much
lower down in the frontal plane.
So you know, I think just, but again, what we're doing there is we're saying well, you know, if I
move peak effort around in the range of motion, it's starting to, you know, send activation
preferentially to different places.
Yeah, it's an interesting way of thinking about it just in terms of the the total amount of muscle
mass being used.
I mean, I guess ultimately just to consolidate my point, anytime an exercise that you're, you're
using like you're using a new exercise that's using less total muscles, a fewer total muscles, that
exercise is not going to be redundant because it's going to be getting motor unit recruitment that
you didn't.
Have as you say, unless you get really gassed doing your kind of multi joint variation, then you run
across the room to do the single joint one, then sure.
I mean like if you've just done your squats and you're crawling along the floor and then you try and
do the extension straight afterwards, yeah, that's probably not going to help.
But you know, if you've got full recovery, you know, leave it 5 minutes or just go and do something
else 1st and come back then.
Yeah, at that point you are going to get higher recruitment in the in the quads than you would have
done in the squat variation that came prior to it.
And the same thing would apply with lutter rays after overhead pressing.
It's it, this is just how Physiology works.
It's like I don't understand why people are struggling with this.
I mean it's the same thing you started talking about the bilateral deficit.
So it's the same thing ultimately with following up with the unilateral version of that exercise,
that unilateral exercise you are going to get Modi unit recruitment that you didn't get in the
bilateral version that's.
Yeah.
I mean, it's kind of like I, I kind of question whether you would want to do that.
I mean like.
Well, it depends on the purpose.
Doesn't.
It if you're going to do, if you're going to do single limb variations for an exercise, why would
you do a bilateral one as well?
I mean that.
It's like the exact same exercise.
Yeah, you would ultimately you would want to you.
Want to change it slightly?
Yeah, yeah.
Pay resistance.
Yeah.
But if if you're going to, I'm just thinking about it practically in my head now, but if you're
going to drop one of those, the 1 you would drop would be the bilateral exercise.
You can keep the unilateral.
Of course.
And it's ultimately and like, but then why?
So here's the thing, right?
If you're doing both of those, you're doing a bilateral curl and a unilateral curl and someone says,
no, you can't do that, it's redundant.
Then you say, OK, well, which one should I get rid of?
And they say we'll get rid of the bilateral because you've got greater mod unit recruitment in the
unilateral.
Then the same argument goes.
So the multi joint exercise or or simple joint exercise.
Correct, but but people say there's an emotional attachment to certain doing to certain things.
OK.
I don't want to get bogged down on this.
So you had another point then?
Yeah.
So basically what we've done then is we've talked about how having this limit on the number of or
the amount of, strictly speaking, the limit, the reason we've got a voluntary activation deficit is
because we have a limit on the amount of central motor command that we can generate before we hit
maximum tolerable perception of effort.
That applies in the case of excise selection that we started with.
We've also applied it in the case of total muscle mass and excises.
And there's also now an argument, you know, this is taking place regarding, you know, using specific
form and technique.
And I just want to make a couple of comments about this to set the context.
Now, I'm not taking sides here.
I'm not saying that people should throw weight around with no regard to, you know, the great.
Form reset.
I think that's what people are calling this.
Well, I think people are probably going a little.
I mean, this is one of those pendulum things and people kind of swing from 1 from 1 history too.
So I'm just going to say a couple of things about this and try and set the context and then relate
it to what's happening physiologically.
So essentially starting at, you know, at the beginning, we've got to classify exercises according to
how much form and technique concentration they're going to require to perform.
So if you're describing an exercise that is very complicated and very difficult to perform without
concentrating you know greatly on exactly what you're doing and where the weight is going and what
the balance is like, you are creating a very large requirement of energy in your brain for that
problem.
So you're essentially requiring effort perception to be dedicated towards the solving of that
coordination problem instead of 2 motor unit recruitment.
So you're never going to have the same level of recruitment in an exercise that is difficult and
complicated and requires a lot of your focus attention on that movement pattern in comparison with
something that has a constrained movement path.
So a very big difference between say you know, a squat on an unstable surface, which is going to
require an enormous amount of concentration from you to do correctly without hurting yourself.
In comparison with a leg press where you, you kind of stuck in the range of motion and the path of
the bar, you know, according to the device that you're sat in.
So and that creates a difference in terms of the number of muscle fibers and the amount of motor
equipment you're going to get in those two exercises.
You're going to get better recruitment level in the more stable constrained path exercise than you
are in the less stable, less constrained to have exercise.
That is, again, just how Physiology works.
If you're dedicating effort perception to coordination, you can't dedicate that effort perception
towards motive agreement.
And as a result, we want exercises that are largely constrained rather than exercises that require a
lot of concentration on the formula technique.
There's there's.
Two issues with that as well though.
Yeah.
So there's also this stability issue in that.
Yes, it.
Is it's coordination degrees of freedom and stability?
Yeah, Yeah.
So, yeah, I mean, you can, you can go down that route as well.
I mean, you can argue that any exercise that involves a lot of, you know, kind of stabilization is
going to introduce a whole load of extra muscles that are responsible for stabilization.
And then you're not training the target muscle as affected because you've got a muscle mass problem
as.
Well, totally.
We're hitting both of these issues you just talked about then.
We are.
We are, yes.
Essentially though, it's just kind of introducing this new idea of if the brain is focusing on
coordinating a movement, it's not using the same effort perception to drive motor unit recruitment.
So you're getting this kind of diversion of mental resources away from producing central motor
command and towards, you know, coordinating the exercise properly.
Now, if you kind of go the next step and say, well, I am using a constrained exercise, I'm using a
knee extension or a leg purse or whatever.
And I'm not, you know, kind of using a complex exercise, but I'm going to focus on doing it in a
very specific way.
You are actually going to create some of the same problem because if you're focusing on doing the
movement in a specific way, then you're ultimately going to be using your mental resources to do
that particular movement pattern in that particular way instead of just using your mental resource
to produce motor nuclear that is in a escapable.
Now you can argue, Oh no, no, but I, there's basically 2 arguments.
I need to do the form in this particular way, maybe to standardize it or you know, maybe because I,
or alternatively because I want to target this particular muscle and I think performing them
exercising this way targets the muscle better.
So you've kind of got these two issues.
Standardization.
Yeah, absolutely.
We do want to do exercises in the same way every time, but ultimately you want to standardize things
externally rather than internally.
So get your external range of motion standardized, you know, by having constraints on the system
that you're working within.
So say for example, I mean, this is obviously not a machine example, but in the case of like squats,
you can put like a elastic resistance band to show what your depth is.
And when you touch depth, you know you've touched depth and it's like that's your constraint, your
external constraint.
So external constraints are much better than internal ones where you're trying to remember where you
are and do it the same time, same way every time.
And ultimately, you know, that's going to give you a better cue for knowing that you're using the
correct range of motion or whatever.
Now, tempo is one of those things that I would just not recommend that people standardize because if
I just just, you know, push the bar, you know, and don't think about tempo because if you start
standardizing tempo, you're going to end up, you know, changing your, your, your, your sort of
number of reps you can do per set.
And it's never really unless you're following a metronome, which is fine.
If you want to do that, that's totally fine.
But you know, it's much more difficult to do that voluntarily because you won't necessarily keep
track of the exact count.
And it'll give you something else to think about instead of what you're supposed to be thinking
about, which is producing motino.
So ultimately the people are, I think over standardising, you know, I think that's, that's going to
lead them if they're not careful into territory where if they're not using external method of
standardization, which is like, you know, cues, tactile cues for disturbing range of motion or
metronomes for determining tempo.
If they're using those, that's fine because they're not at they're outsourcing the thinking process
to an external agent.
That's the issue.
I have no problem with people actually using a tempo, but they've got to externally outsource it
because otherwise their brain is doing the thinking and that's not really very good idea.
And when you say in tempo, I mean you're many standardized tempo because you can say okay, well,
lower under control.
Well, that doesn't mean that you need to be counting to.
You need the exact precise same as.
Soon as you give your brain something to do other than pushing the bar, you are pulling resources
away from your brain producing Motina equipment.
So if you want to follow a metronome in the lowering phase.
Because honestly, anybody who's lifting with heavy or moderately heavy loads probably can't
introduce much of A tempo anyway in the concentric phase.
If they can, then they're probably a lot further away from failure than they think they are.
Ultimately it's going to be a lowering phase tempo.
Just follow a metronome.
If you can't do that, then you need to.
You're going to end up with a mental resource issue that is taking you away from your ability.
If you're counting in your head, yeah, yeah.
So because I guess the point I want to make here is there's a difference between doing like a 2010
tempo where you're doing a 2 second eccentric and, and that's the way I would write it down, but I
don't need someone necessarily counting 1-2.
This is the way you're learning to perform this exercise and you're just thinking, I'm not, I'm just
not dropping the load.
That's all I need you to think.
Right.
Compared to if someone were to do, I remember back in the day, I would do stupid things like 10
second eccentric.
So 8 second eccentric.
Yeah.
And then just stuck in your head 1-2 and you're counting.
Perfect.
You need to be using a metronome, and ideally in those situations, it probably needs to be counting
for you so that you don't have to count the beeps.
You know, this is just me illustrating that if you're concentrating on something that isn't pushing
the bar, your brain is pulling away the ability to do noting recruitment to do other things instead,
and that's not helpful for hypertrophy.
And this is not, I don't feel like this is contentious.
I mean, when I was working in the gym, but if we got new clients in the gym and everyone knew good
coaching technique was we do not give the client 10 cues to think about at the start of each set.
Give them one thing at most you say, OK, this is the only thing I want to worry about.
I'm not going to tell you have your chest up and feet here and this that and whatever.
No, no, no, I don't need you stuck in your head thinking about a billion different things.
We know that that's going to take you away from the exercise.
Yeah, you know, perfect your form this way.
You need to be counting this number of repetitions or, you know, this slow tempo or whatever.
It's like, well, there's just more thing.
It's it's the same as queues.
It's just more to think about.
Exactly.
Exactly.
So ideally we want to be pulling away from that.
Now if somebody goes to the extent where they're, they're they're starting to change their form in
order to create an internal focus retention.
So they're like I'm, I'm actually using, I want to change the way I'm doing the exercise in order to
focus more on this particular muscle group.
Then that internal focus retention is now going to follow the basic rules of internal focus
retention.
So what is going to happen is that you're going to get activation pulled away from other muscles in
order to activate the muscle that you're interested in.
Now, in traditional bodybuilding situations, that muscle that you're pulling activation towards is
usually the target muscle.
So for example, if somebody is doing, you know, a traditional kind of bodybuilding approach, they're
going, I'm going to squeeze this muscle while I'm training it.
OK?
That internal focus attention, that mind muscle connection, you're pulling activation away from many
of the other muscles that would be helping you perform the lift in question.
So essentially what happens in those situations is that the number of reps per set generally goes
down.
You're 10 re/max becomes your 8 re/max or 7 re/max or whatever.
Now in that scenario, you end up actually activating that target muscle to a slightly higher degree,
which is one of the reasons why people are very excited about using my muscle connection and, and
potentially, you know, you know, could it create more hypertrophy?
Well, in the short term it will do.
But what will happen is if you try and use progressive overload from that point, then what will
happen is that your brain will start pulling you away from using the internal focus on that muscle
route because it will go back to using whatever it can to drive the number of reps up.
So you can't really, the internal focus attention and progressive overload are incompatible with
each other because what happens if you look at your logbook and go, oh, I got 7 reps last time, I
need to get 8 reps this time.
Your brain immediately goes, well, the easiest way to do that is to stop using the internal focus
attention and to start using the way I was doing it before.
So you gradually just end up diluting your internal focus back to essentially what you were doing
before that, which is a goal directed exercise rather than a muscle mass directed exercise.
Now, if on the other hand, somebody goes, I need to make sure that I do this exercise in this exact
way, and that requires me to contract these stabilizing muscles.
Yeah.
So they're now driving an exercise, you know, kind of coordination pattern or form or whatever, by
using certain stabilization muscles.
Then the internal focus retention happens the same way, but it now pulls activation away from the
muscle that you're trying to train.
And that's the thing I think a lot of people are not understanding.
If you do an exercise and you're having to brace yourself in a particular way to force the bar path
to happen in a certain particular way, or you, you you're trying to make the exercise happen in a
way that is unusual to you or different from where you.
Yeah, the same thing will happen, drop repetitions, you'll drop down from 6:50 or whatever, but you
won't be then forcing the activation towards the muscle that you're actually trying to train in the
1st place.
And the same thing will happen with progressive overload.
When you start with using progressive overload and you try and beat the logbook, your brain again
will go, well, the easiest way to beat the logbook is to just stop doing these silly things with the
Co contractions and the, you know, kind of forcing activation away from the target muscle and it'll
go back to what he was doing before.
Ultimately new mechanical matching will try and send activation priority in priority terms to the
muscles that help you do the exercise.
If you override that by sign to contract and Co contract and do all kinds of weird stuff with
internal focuses attention then it'll do that for a short period of time.
But as you start to try and push the load up it'll just delete all of that and go back to what it
was doing before.
I remember a competitive power lifter telling me.
Once that when he was benching, he wanted to lift with his ears that every muscle that could
possibly help him out, he wanted to use it.
And totally true.
Yeah.
And what you're saying there, if you're focusing on mind muscle connection, you're certainly not
lifting with the ears, you're lifting just with your chest or whatever the muscles you're focusing
on.
So the outcome of the performance is going to decline.
But what you said is you will actually get more motivated recruitment in that particular muscle
temporarily until you go back to.
The log book and start trying to push the weight up and then then you go.
Back to lifting with your ears.
And it is, it's literally just, I used to say toes in mentorship program when I was describing this
as like you, you're bench pressing with your toes.
I mean, is that's how you end up moving the way up.
So I think a lot of people at the moment are probably getting very excited about the fact that
they've changed their form and their number of reps per set has dropped and they think that that
means something.
I'm like, well, not really, because what's going to happen is that you're gradually going to move
back to where you were three or four weeks ago over the space, you know, kind of next few workers,
you start reducing your and you just go back to how you were.
Before and you have just had a bit of an.
Experiment and and and like you realized it doesn't really do that much.
So This is why we talked a while ago and I think maybe the isometrics.
Podcast.
Perhaps we were talking about ways that one could use internal focus of attention and not be limited
by this progressive overload challenge that you've presented there.
And using it with something like an isometric, which you're kind of limited in tracking progressive
overload anyway, could be a viable, I guess, situation or circumstance where one could do it
totally, totally, yeah.
I mean and ultimately.
That's, you know, kind of going back to the, you know, even pre silver era bodybuilding period of
time, you know, that's that's that was a big feature of of of the flexing kind of based training
programs.
So yeah, I mean, there's nothing wrong with doing that.
It's just.
Again, I'm just trying to provide context for how.
Physiology is happening in the background because I think there's this, the human, human nature's
fascinating thing.
We tend to think that we get an idea in our heads and we tend to think that Physiology would just
follow the idea.
So we want to do this and we think Physiology is going to fall into line with that, and it doesn't
do that.
It's like Physiology is going to carry on doing exactly what it's always been doing.
And if your strategy doesn't take that into account, it'll end up doing something you don't quite
expect.
It'll have unintended consequences.
And I think that when people are focusing on a very, very strict type of form that goes above and
beyond just being safe, then what they're going to do is they're going to pull away motive
recruitment from the muscles that they're trying to train and either send it to other muscles or
just not create it at all because it's being used to the perception of effort is being used for
something else.
So this whole form debate, and I know that we don't want to get to.
Go to down into it, but ultimately, if we're looking at an exercise and we're looking at at what
makes quote UN quote good or bad form, I mean, ultimately the purpose of the exercise is to train
whatever that target muscle is, right?
So the form should be done in a way in which that muscle is ultimately going to be the the main
muscle being trained in that particular exercise, right?
So for example, if you're doing, you know, the head press, well, I I'm going to stop you because I
think that's a.
Little bit potentially misleading if if somebody doesn't understand what you're saying there.
So I don't think you can phrase it as we want to do the form in a way that trains the target muscle
because if you do that, then you're going to be using an internal focus retention all the time.
I think we select the exercise and the range of motion and those things on the basis that it
automatically targets the muscle that we want to train or the reason the muscle we want to train
without us having to change the form to make that happen.
And then really form is about safety in the context of that exercise.
So really when when somebody starts talking about form, my, my, my, my reaction is, are you safe?
Like, yeah, well, that was the second point I was going to make, so.
Talking about form then.
So because anything beyond safety is going to pull you away from creating Moto.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
So from an excise selection.
Standpoint, I think, I know this is a little bit of a semantics argument, but I still think it's an
important one.
So I think we're looking at it from a different entry point.
So what you said there is that excise is chosen because it, it achieves that outcome, right?
It's it's training that muscle.
And so in the case of let's say an overhead press and you're saying, OK, if I want to train, let's
say the middle delt, then I might select a behind the neck overhead press, right.
And so that's your starting point.
What exercise can I select for this?
OK, great.
And now how do I perform this without getting injured?
And I agree completely.
Now what you said there is you're going to program in that example, a behind the neck overhead press
done in the frontal plane.
Now, I think the people are not being specific enough with exercise selection.
And So what we're seeing a lot is people are saying do an overhead press, do a bench press, do a
blap, pull down, whatever.
And it's like, OK, but unless you give me the specifics there of we're doing behind the neck or
we're doing a Saturnal plane or we're doing top partial or whatever, Unless we're getting very
specific, that exercise can feasibly be done in a way that's going to train at the very least bias
different parts of that muscle group and possibly almost neglect some of it completely or, or
heavily emphasized particular parts.
And so that's, I guess what I meant when I was, you know, coming out saying, does it train what we
want to train?
But if we want to use out the, the language of just being specific, very specific with the, the
actual excise selection, I, I'm happy with that too.
But I think we're not seeing that.
No, I, I agree.
I think that's that's the problem.
It's like.
People have been cavalier about describing the exercise that they're programming and then trying to
make up for that cavalier behavior by, you know, changing the, you know, kind of description around
the way that the excise formed under the heading of of form.
I think there's two interesting human kind of psychology issues here that are worth pointing out.
The 1st is that in in relation to the arguments around form, people are trying to push it into being
a binary conversation.
They're trying to go you either care about form or you don't.
It's like, no, that's not an acceptable, that's an emotional tribal kind of argument.
Let's just let's just stop that right there.
That's time didn't need any childish.
Yeah, so like people.
Are as soon as I say you don't need to, I'm not saying you don't need to.
I'm saying it's actively unhelpful to over focus on, you know, performing exercise in a very
specific way.
They're like, oh, you don't care about safety and like, no, don't be childish.
I'm saying you do the form in a way that is, you know, ensuring your safety in the exercise.
That is, you know, obviously, you know, kind of goes without saying beyond that any focus on form,
you are going to take away effort perception from your ability to create routine improvement.
And it's therefore not going to be very helpful if you're using it to push activation towards muscle
groups.
You're going to run into the internal focus detention problem and you're better off just getting
your exercise selection correct like you've just been pointing out.
So ultimately, that's kind of where I see the the debate really.
The other interesting human psychology point is that I think that we're we're in the performative
problem that bodybuilders have have been milking for the last few decades where they basically, you
know, there's, you know, historically if you look at competitive bodybuilders, they've been, you
know, finding things to convince people of that they do that are different, that somehow has created
their amazing physiques.
And it's not the pharmaceuticals, you know, so like, you know, bodybuilders basically been kind of
saying, Oh, no, you need to do this, you know, kind of pause in the contractor position and squeeze
the muscle.
And it's like, and that's somehow magically how I've managed to create my amazing physique.
And it's not all of this kind of gear that I've been taking for the last kind of 10 years.
And I think there's this performative aspect where bodybuilders are trying to show people specific
things that if they only did this, they could get those results.
You actually see this going all the way back to Sandow, you know, it's like they're like, oh, well,
you can just you don't have to lift the weights and you don't have to do this.
You can just do these muscle control exercises like, well, that's a bit debatable, but you know, OK.
And you see it the same thing.
And then with bodybuilders, it's like if you just do the forming this way, you can get the same
results as me.
And it's like not the, you know, in the case of natural bodybuilders, it's not the five years of
extremely hard work and dedication and not eating, you know, kind of the things that I want to eat
and all of those suffering and and kind of difficult times that they've gone through to get the
results.
And it's like, no, no, no, you can just do the form in the way that I'm doing it and you'll get the
same results and the body will just sort of, you know, competitive and using pharmaceuticals.
They're arguing the same thing, but from a much more comfortable position.
I'm not saying it's about, you know, kind of whether it's anabolic users or non anabolic users.
I'm just pointing out that people are trying to distract from what actually creates results and
pointing out that maybe it's the form thing that makes the difference.
I'm like, no, it's not.
That's performative, that's marketing.
That's trying to get you to believe that they have some secret sauce that's different from everybody
else and it's not.
It all just comes down to excise selection, you know, execution of high levels of voting agreement
and dedication to that over a very long period of time.
I mean, there's a big perform performative aspect here, I think.
Yeah, it is sort of that sacred knowledge thing, isn't it, you know?
This, it's done this special way and that's what leads to this result.
I mean, ultimately, like if form is so bad, if we can use that, that word, then ultimately one's not
even performing that exercise anymore.
So like either you are performing that exercise or you're not.
And if you are, why do we need to get so bogged down in the finer details?
Really.
Yeah.
I mean like people have been posting videos of.
For example, there's a a rather famous science based lifter who does their, their rowing form is, is
quite something to behold.
It's basically a hip extension exercise with a kind of a bit of an elbow movement tag tagged on.
And they're kind of they're moving backwards and forwards so aggressively that you you could argue
that it's no longer the exercising question.
Yeah, I mean, look, that's a great example yeah.
Because someone might then come to you and be.
Like, Oh well, you've just said form doesn't really matter.
And look at this.
Does this mean that I can this performance grow like this?
And ultimately you've just said that, well, you push it far enough and it's not even that exercise
anymore and you're not actually going to be getting much out of that muscle.
Yeah, I mean, I think.
My point would be that if if the person is not, I mean like I think this particular individual is
deliberately doing that to get views, but I think that if the exercise naturally pushes you, let me
let me be really clear about this because I think this is important.
If you're doing a, an exercise like a row and you find yourself being moved out of position, then
that's not a good exercise for you.
So if you are naturally doing the exercise and you are pulling the row or you're pressing whatever
and you find that your body is being moved out position, that is not a good exercise.
That is an exercise that is for whatever reason, and the combination of forces is pushing you out of
the position that you need to be in to perform the exercise correctly.
And I would simply suggest that person find a more comfortable machine exercise that doesn't allow
them to do that.
For example, in the case that I'm thinking of, the individual is doing a a seated chest supported
row and their chest is flying back from the chest support every time they do a row because they're
doing this huge amount of hip extension.
Now in the individual's case, if they were to do a an inclined T bar row, they would probably find
it a lot more difficult to launch themselves into space, yeah, than if they were just.
Sitting in that kind of.
You know, machine seated chest put the road.
So in the case of that particular individual, if they genuinely want like, oh, you're telling me I
can't concentrate on form, but look at how I'm moving my body away from the chest support every time
I do the road.
It's not a good exercise for you.
Pick an exercise where you don't have to do that.
And I actually, as I say, I think that most people are not going to fly back from the chest support
in that situation.
I think that most people probably are going to be quite comfortable.
I think this person is probably just, you know, playing it up for the camera.
But, you know, in the case that is true and that person genuinely is struggling to make that
exercise work for them because whatever reason, their body dimensions just mean that they push and
pull themselves away from the chess sport.
Just do a different exercise that doesn't require you to think quite so hard.
So is there anything else that you think would?
Constitute again to use this term, bad form.
Obviously you've mentioned they're doing it in a way that could get one injured, but are there other
examples like the one you've just given that you think would be a good maybe encouragement for
someone to dance like different exercise instead?
Well, as I say it it, I don't think.
There is anything else that I can think of right now other than just if for whatever reason your
body dimensions don't fit well with a machine or a particular exercise.
And for example, I mean, like I gave him the machine exercise example of the seated row, which I've
seen video of people doing this one particular person doing and they tends to get shared quite a
lot.
Barbell exercises are probably easier examples like the standing barbell row, I think is just a bad
exercise because everybody ends up with so much body English and they end up doing massive amounts
of hip extension.
Now, again, in specific context, you can see people are doing so much hip extension, it's almost
kind of a bent over power clean.
I mean, like you, you get those kind of people who are using so much hip extension that it's not a,
but that's a bad exercise for that reason because it actually doesn't allow you to control it very
well.
But equally, you can find people whose body dimensions are not suited to squatting.
You know, you can find really tall people and if they've got, unless they've got ridiculous ankle
mobility, they are not going to be able to squat very well without changing the form into something
that you would look at and go, not happy with that.
That looks like a, that looks like a squat morning to me.
I'm like, the dude is 6 foot 7, what do you expect?
I mean, unless he's got ankle mobility like Constina, he's not going to get into that position very
easily.
Now, OK, you can have arguments about whether that needs to be addressed or whether you just do a
different exercise or not.
But from a bodybuilding point of view, I'd be like, just do a different exercise because whatever
reason, your body doesn't fit that particular exercise very well.
There are plenty of other good alternatives.
You don't need to do an exercise just because somebody on social media told you that you needed to
do it.
So I think there's a kind of, there's two things here, both, I mean, they're the same thing, but
it's looked at from different perspectives.
On the one hand, there are some exercises that are just bad because they force almost everybody to
use poor form in the sense that it's not doing what you want to do.
The the standing bent over Barber Row is not designed to train the hip extensors, but most people
end up training the hip extensors and the lower back because the exercise naturally ends up
promoting body English to get progressive overload.
Yeah.
And so that's not a form issue then like you're saying, that's an.
Exercise like that exercise is just not a well, it what it what it does is it falls into this
category of like if.
You imagine like very few people probably are going to be in the category of a seated machine row,
chest supported row being a bad exercise for them because they use too much body English.
Most people are going to be OK with that.
Like next thing like so there's going to, but there are going to be potentially some people for whom
it's not a good idea because, you know, they just naturally end up using tons of hip extension.
But maybe the next thing across is like, well, what about standing biceps curls with a barbell?
Some people, again, most people can be OK with that or an easy bar, whichever is comfortable.
But some people are going to find that inevitably just because the amount of weight they're using
and their centre of mass and the, you know, kind of how strong they are relative to the body weight,
they're going to find themselves getting moved around.
I probably fall into that category.
I tend to get moved around if I start doing biceps, skulls and standing biceps, 2 arms.
But then there's the third category is like the standing bent over Barber row where almost everybody
gets moved around.
So what you can say is that there are just.
Exercises that.
Are going to be more or less even like barbell kill?
Is that even?
Like is that bad form?
Is that a bad exercise?
Like if you're doing That's what I'm saying.
If if if you're if the weight.
Is throwing you around because it's kind of it's the thing around in in the sense that you would be
using momentum at the bottom right.
And if we're doing a barbell, well, hang on a minute.
If you look at, if you look at the world.
Kind of record and championships around standing, barbell curl, strict curls.
They do actually have a board that people lean against.
And the reason for that is because the weight will literally move you around if you don't have that.
Yeah, but it'll move you around to the bottom like when you're starting that.
Repetition.
Well, it'll actually move you around all.
The way through, especially when you're in the middle and it's the hardest point because it's your
your career, you're changing where your centre of mass is in space.
Yeah.
And look, this might be maybe I was struggling to conceive this because.
I weigh like 105 kilos and you weigh sure, certainly unchanged.
Yeah, yeah.
And so.
But for me, what I've noticed if I'm doing.
Like heavy barbell curls, I'm not getting moved around like hit mid, mid Rep, but at the start I'm I
am getting moved around at that very beginning point and I'm looking at that.
I'm thinking, well, hang on.
OK, I might be using a little bit of momentum, a little bit of body English at the very starting
point.
But that curl ultimately is going to be more of a brachyaryiallis focus exercise anyway.
I'm still going to get to that point in that exercise without compromising that muscles involvement.
Is that even bad form?
Guess it looks like a cheating curl a little bit, but is that even bad?
It's still doing exactly what I wanted to do.
I'm not getting injured.
Like I'm struggling to even conceive what I even say again again.
So like this?
Is this is where you would then say, well, is the exercise still doing what it's supposed to do even
though there's a little bit of bad form in there?
I would argue that if you're doing, if you're doing seated rows and you're doing them primarily with
hip extension or you're doing Bentibababa rows, you're doing them primarily with hip extension.
That's not now doing the thing that you were setting out to do.
Yep, if you're so that's.
The distinction there is it still.
Doing what you want.
It to do and has it increased injury risk and if those I mean if you're doing a standing barbell
curl and you need to just kind of.
Nudge it with your hip to get it going then.
Is that bad form?
Not really standardizing it.
I guess that's the other bit.
If you're doing that one Rep and.
You're not doing the next Rep, OK, maybe that's bad form because it's stopping you and inhibiting
you from actually standardizing and aggressively overloading.
Yeah, yeah.
So, but again, what we're doing.
Is, and just to be clear, a lot of people are going to listen to this and they're going to go, Oh,
well, you're saying it's nuanced and they're saying it's nuanced and you're all agreeing, no,
everything that I'm everything that I'm doing is saying you need to externally constrain what you're
doing, not internally constrained yes.
And the external constraints come from the decisions that you make before you even start about the
exercise that you're going to do and how the excise is going to be controlled in terms of like if
you're going to use a metronome for tempo, if you're going to use range of motion for, you know,
kind of guiding it, whatever you set those constraints in advance externally or you make decisions
about things you don't care about.
Internal constraining is where you go, oh, I need to focus on making sure the path path is exactly
like this and the tempo is exactly like this and I'm going to count that is pulling stuff away from
your ability to create motive agreement.
External constraints is what we're talking about doesn't do that because it actually outsources all
of your thinking and, you know, concentration to decisions that you make before you even start.
So for people who are thinking, oh, well, no, you're arguing about different types of form and
whether different types of form are acceptable, not acceptable.
And it's all nuanced and blah, blah, blah, blah, blah.
No, I'm not.
I'm following a very, very specific trajectory here, which is that is it internally constrained by
your brain or is it externally constrained by things that you're deciding before you even start?
If you can get in position to do the.
Exercise, and to do that exercise correctly, you then need to be thinking about the specific
movements and cues and everything else in your head.
Then there's probably better exercises that one can choose exactly, which is why I'm saying a.
Better approach is to make the decisions before you even start or watch how you're doing an
exercise.
And if you think that your exercises, you know, kind of breaking form in inverted commas, then you
probably are better off finding something that's better suited to your body dimensions than the one
that you were doing previously as a coach who mostly works with people online.
I live by the mantra of I try to prescribe exercises that I guess, I guess I could say here, unscrew
uppable, maybe I'll use different language, but I don't want to give someone exercise that is
there's a high chance you're going to stuff it up.
And I was talking decline about this this topic.
And he said to me similar that he uses exercises that have the highest margin of error.
He'd give it to a client and it's it's so unlikely they can screw this up totally, totally.
That's what I think a lot of this comes back.
To Yeah.
Totally.
I mean that again, that's you're literally doing.
Exactly what I'm describing here.
You know you're setting your external constraints in advance.
You're making your decisions that make it almost impossible to go wrong.
Yeah, You know, it's like, you know, we're we're we're making these decisions because most people
most of the time are going to be absolutely fine with these.
I mean, honestly, until I saw this particular person doing seated rows with hip extension, I didn't
actually believe that was possible to do that.
You know, I actually thought it was, it was pretty impossible to screw up a seated row, seated chest
supported row machine.
I was like that.
That is one of my staple exercises.
How can you do that wrong?
But apparently you can.
And again, it may be the case is either playing up with the camera or maybe the case it genuinely
his body dimensions make that exercise a bad fit for him.
Doesn't really matter.
Just do something different.
I mean, it's like, yeah, yeah.
Or call it a row back extension and then your form is spot on your exercise.
Your form is right, just change the definition of the exercise.
And then your form is correct for whatever it is that you decided to do.
OK, Is there anything else that needs to be said on the topic or is?
That hopefully covering most of it, hopefully that is everything.
So just repeating a.
Structure that I set out with, what I was trying to explain here is that the fact that we can't
recruit every single Moat unit and therefore can't activate every single mussifier in a kind of
exercise, whatever exercise it is we're doing that could contribute.
So like you know, we can't activate every single mussifier that could contribute means that we are
going to end up leaving some muscle fibers untrained and no matter what we do and it's which muscle
fibers we end up not training is the important thing for exercise selection.
As regards muscle mass, all we're doing is manipulating the total amount of muscle fibers that we
are able to activate total motor units to recruit and obviously using less muscle mass can be
better.
And then regarding excise form and temperate, what I'm saying is that if you're focusing really hard
and concentrating really hard on a particular way of doing something, then generally Speaking of
pulling away recruitment and you're making voluntary activation deficit even bigger than it actually
has to be.
Now before we start the podcast, I also mentioned you're asking me if there's any other things that
we can incorporate into this matrix again.
Yeah, sure.
If somebody's doing like drop sets and finishes and anything that involves high cardiovascular
demand, all of that stuff again is going to make the voluntary activation deficit even bigger.
So just because you're hitting failure point in an X size or a set or a sort of drop set or
whatever, doesn't mean you're hitting the same level of recruitment as you were doing previously.
You actually mentioned this in the context of volume earlier and you're saying doing an extra set
somehow recruits more motor units?
No, it recruits fewer motor units.
And again, the fatigue mechanisms, especially perception related ones, are going to produce a
further reduction in the number of motor units and therefore the number of muscle fibers we're
training.
So all of this is just explicable by understanding the context that we can't actually recruit every
single motor unit and every single multiplier that could contribute to a movement despite reaching
maximal effort.
And we can actually quite easily make it even worse by doing the wrong thing.
So all of that.
Ignoring the form bit because that's not going to work with what I'm about to ask.
And this is my last question.
If we then go back to our Larry Scott work out of the start of this podcast and we evaluate that
program against this framework you've just proposed, what do we see?
What are the, the shortcomings there?
Because ultimately all these exercises are using quite a lot of muscle mass.
We, I mean we've got single joint arm exercises, but everything else is multi joint we've got.
Many sets with short.
Dress periods causing?
Yes, we did.
Talk about some metabolite fatigue.
But ultimately, there's going to be higher perception of effort here.
There's going to be more superspinal CNS fatigue here.
We've got fewer total exercises with the multi sets.
So given what we're talking about in in today's topic of of maximizing activation, you would look at
this program and think you'd probably missed the mark a bit.
Yeah.
So there's there's ways to.
You know, take a step from this, but ultimately, you know, this is a program that is getting good
coverage, not perfect coverage, but good coverage of the muscle groups.
It is doing that three times a week, full body format.
And as a result, it is going to be a lot better than some of the nonsense that we see circulating
today on social media.
It's kind of like a, as you point, as you kind of pointed out, it's it could be a really good
beginner program to get someone started as long as we cut the sets in half and did three sets
instead of, you know, kind of, you know, 6.
But yeah, I mean, honestly, I would much rather introduce an extra exercise for each kind of broad
category of, of muscle groups that they're, they're training and, and cut the sets down to a single
set and just do 11, you know, kind of two different pressing variations, you know, or three
different pressing variations, whatever.
And start to expand the variety a little bit at the expense of, of losing some of the sets.
I think, you know, we're, we're still in this kind of process of getting away from the kind of five
years ago territory where people were just spamming sets on four or five exercises and they were
doing like 8 to 10 sets of each exercise.
You know, and it's like we're now getting to this moving away from that.
We're now going, hang on a minute.
Much better to just do a couple of exercises instead of doing, you know, spamming sets for every
single exercise that you do.
Oh, yeah, yeah, yeah.
Makes no sense.
Yeah, yeah, there's there's no scenario.
I mean you, you've made this case.
Really.
Well, in the past, there is no scenario in which doing 2 sets of one exercise is going to be better
than doing 2 exercises for one set each for the same kind of broad kind of area of the body that
you're trying to train.
There's no scenario in which you can argue by doing 2 sets of, you know, bench press is better than
doing, you know, sort of, you know, one particular grip with bench press is better than doing an
inclined close grip versus a, a flat bench wide grip.
I mean, there's no scenario in which that is ever possibly going to be true.
If someone wants to make the case, then make the case.
The interesting thing is nobody ever sends this stuff to me and says this is what I think, why do
you disagree with me?
What they do is they just like sort of slander me behind the scenes and say rude things have about
me.
And then I hear about it from other people who say, oh, this person is insulting you and saying
this, that and the next.
I'm like, well, they've not actually communicated to me what they think and they've not actually
tried to persuade me that they are correct and I'm wrong.
They're not taking they're not taking me seriously in that respect.
They're not actually saying, well, here's my idea and here's your idea.
And This is why we're different.
They don't want to be compared in that way.
They just want to, you know, throw kind of mud at me from, from, from from a safe place.
So.
But anyway, that's beside the point.
The the the the thing I'm I'm I'm pointing out here is that I, if somebody believes that there is a
mechanism, A physiological mechanism by which two sets of one exercises can be better than single
sets of two separate exercises that train broadly in the same area but with slight differences.
They're welcome to make that case and we'll listen to it.
But I cannot see any possible way that they can win the argument.
Yeah, I mean, look, that's a a good challenge.
Like if someone does have.
A mechanism as to how that's possible, then, you know, that's our challenge.
She like, let us know, send Chris a message, send me a message, send talk about it online.
I'm sure it'll, it'll end up back to us at some point anyway.
And then we can talk about it on a podcast.
Yeah, I mean that latter approach doesn't really work because.
There's just what I think most people don't realise, I mean, there's a, there's an absolute army of
tiny creators on especially TikTok who are all just kind of positioning themselves against this
model that I've presented and saying, you know, Chris is an idiot because he doesn't believe this or
he, he disagrees with me on these, these issues.
What they don't realise is that there are a billion of you guys and there's only one of me.
So, you know, ultimately it's doing what you're doing may get you, you know, another 573 followers
if that's important to you, but it's not going to get you any further than that.
You're not going to go anywhere with this.
But, you know, if, if that's what you want, if that's the size that you've set for yourself, then
fine.
But ultimately it isn't really going to do anything interesting in this universe that we're living
in.
And I'd hoped that you would play for slightly higher stakes than that, but that's, it's your
decision.
I mean, it's not, it's not my my life to lead.
Well, I look forward to seeing what physiological.
Explanations come up for why multi sets would beat single sets of multi exercises and if it's
compelling enough, then by all means I'm going to start programming that way.
But I hold my breath, OK?
Thank you everyone for joining us for another episode in 2026.
I hope you've all had a wonderful start to the year and I hope you'll join us again next week for
another episode.