Episode: 049 The data says you need more first sets
URL: https://open.spotify.com/episode/0pr8Dy6YLepAiu3PJEHGDA
Published: 2026-04-26
================================================================================

Welcome back everyone to another episode of Hypertrophy, past and present.
Chris, this is the second time I'm seeing you this week.
I saw you just the other day.
I don't even know how long ago it was.
Now it's like midnight for me.
So it's all a bit of a blur.
But we started our first or had our first webinar for the Transcend Coaching certification, and
we're joined by like 30, 2:00-ish people, which was amazing because obviously time zones are very
difficult to coordinate all over the globe.
But it was an awesome first call anyway.
How are you doing today?
Yeah, doing well.
Thank you.
Yeah, it's and as you say, strange to be to be doing two of these in a week, but I'm sure I shall
get into the screen as we go.
On, on our call on the on the webinar, someone was commenting that they wanted Rob to be there and
Rob was in fact on the call and he messaged in the chat and and said hello and, and that person I
think lost their mind.
But I thought maybe in, in not, not memory.
Rob's not dead.
What's the word I'm looking for?
I'm inspired by Rob.
I would give us a strength based powerlifting style silver aerial plan today.
So Rob, if you're listening, this is for you.
So it's just a plan from Paul Anderson.
Now people may recognize Anderson because he has a, an exercise named after him, the Anderson squad.
Now, to be fair, it's an exercise that many people would really do, but essentially it's a, it's a
variation of a squat where you're beginning in the bottom position from pins.
Not super relevant, not something we're going to talk about today.
But I think it's always interesting when there's people who have exercises named after them and
have, I guess, started entire sort of trends and exercise patterns.
So Anderson was an incredibly strong man.
So he was one of the strongest people.
So before steroids, OK, so we're talking 1950s and this plan was actually from 1954, so well before
steroids were being used.
And he was one of the strongest men on the planet.
So he won gold in the actually I think it was the Australian Olympics and that was what was that 56.
So, and that was weightlifting and he's predominantly known for his squat strength, but you know,
all around obviously strong, strong man.
And like I said, pre steroids and this plan is is an overall weight lifting plan.
So it is a little bit different to kind of the hypertrophy focus plans we normally talk about.
But if you were to look up Anderson, obviously he's a strength athlete, OK.
So he's not, you know, intending to get on a bodybuilding stage, but there's no doubting that this
guy had slabs of muscle, like his legs look like flipping tree trunks, like they're just huge.
So I thought, hey, let's see what this guy does to build legs in that size.
And this is what he does.
I really like this plan.
Actually, I've actually borrowed, I've taken part of this plan and introduced into my own
programming over the last few months because I actually really like one element of it.
But I'll get to that in a moment.
So this was actually a six days per week plan in the 50s.
You know, that's relatively unheard of ish.
So it's, it's not like a standard split.
Like it's, you pointed out actually before we started recording that it's almost an upper lower
split in a sense.
But the main workout day, which was done three times per week, which was I, let's, let's call it
upper body day, consisted of an overhead press.
And he did 2 sets of two reps.
Now he didn't talk about warm up sets, but I imagine he did do a number of warm up sets to get to
this because he was overhead pressing over 140 kilos.
So I'm imagining there's a couple of at least warm up repetitions in there.
So 2 sets of two.
And then he went into dumbbell press, so flat dumbbell press.
And this was only 60K dumbbells.
And he worked.
He did 2 sets of three repetitions, which I can only imagine would have been so difficult to get
into position.
Anyone who's ever drenched very heavy dumbbells before, we'll no doubt be able to attest to that.
And then he did the Olympic weightlifting lifts here.
So he did a snatch and a clean, and he just did multiple repetitions with that, multiple sets.
And then he did his deadlift and he did 2 sets of triples.
Now, you pointed out that for some lifters, it might look a little bit more like a back exercise and
a leg exercise depending on how they're lifting, which is why I'm kind of calling this his upper
body day.
But obviously he's, you know, got the deadlift here.
And then he concluded with a clean pull to waist height and that was done with 225 kilos or 226.8
kilos to be precise.
And he did four sets of three repetitions with that.
Now he, I don't know how long these workouts took, but he would rest over 10 minutes between sets,
which considering he's only doing double s and triples, I think is a pretty insane amount of time.
These workouts must have been quite lengthy, which probably helps explain why his next workout he
actually performed squats only.
So he took his squats out obviously from that, you know, sort of full body one workout day.
And he performed squats 3 times per week by themself.
And he did, he would sometimes just do a single set and sometimes he would do two or three sets and
he would do 2 repetitions.
So that entire work out was just one to three sets just of squats.
Now he was squatting over 300 kilos.
So again, I'm sure there would have been a whole number of warm up sets to get to that point, but he
would just do one to three working sets, 2 repetitions, 10 to 15 minutes between those sets.
And that was it for his squatting.
Now that's the bit actually I really like.
So I often if you know, we've talked, I think even last episode we talked about the demand of some
of these big multi join exercises if you're doing them within a workout that has a whole lot of
other exercises.
And for me, I actually sometimes take my squat out of my full body day and inspired by Anderson,
I'll put my squat by itself on a separate day and just do two or three sets of two or three
repetitions with it in a manner that's not going to impact recovery the next day.
And I really enjoy that.
So thank you Anderson, for giving me that bit of inspiration.
Chris, what do you think this plan?
Yeah.
I mean, it's so, it's so striking that the plan is, you know, perfectly in line with what silver era
bodybuilders were doing.
It's just he's doing, he's focusing obviously on the important lifts for his competition.
And, and just to be clear, put this in context.
Until 1976, the overhead press was part of the Olympic weightlifting competition.
So we tend to think about the Olympic weightlifting competition as being the snatch and the clean
and jerk.
But until 76, it was actually included 1/3 lift, which was the overhead press.
They withdrew it for the 76 competitions because people were leaning back too much.
It was turning into a standing bench.
Which if, if people don't know.
Yeah, if people haven't heard that before.
Google, because it looks hilarious.
It's.
Insane.
So you've got numb like, like it's difficult to get exact numbers for what, you know, people were
lifting.
Obviously you can see here Anderson's lifting like 150 odd kilos, you know, in his training overhead
press, which is insane.
I mean, allegedly people were kind of putting 100 and 9200 kilos overhead, which is just, you know,
ridiculous.
I mean, I just can't get my head around that.
But yeah.
So basically you have to bear in mind that when when Anderson won gold in the I think it was 5056 in
Melbourne, Australia.
Yeah, he was, yeah.
I mean, he set a world record at that time with 500K total for three lifts all overhead.
It's just mad.
So, yeah, I mean, ultimately he's focusing on those lifts and Nova Press obviously is, is, is a, is
a critical part of that three lift competition.
So he's necessarily, you know, focusing on coordination and he's doing, you know, a couple of sets
of a couple of repetitions to maximize his coordination recruitment and also get his his muscle
growth.
You know, when people say, you know, you can't build muscle with low reps, you can't build muscle
with small numbers of sets and reps, you just show them this.
It's like literally this guy was the, you know, one of the biggest, strongest man on the planet.
He's competed in the Super heavyweight category, you know, so you know, it's, it's, it's obvious
that it's totally doable to build.
I mean, we haven't talked about Hepburn much on this podcast.
Is it same, same, same?
Literally same kind of category really.
I mean, little bit more volume, but basically the same kind of thing.
Yes, yeah, and interestingly, Hepburn also makes a comment in I don't know.
Have you seen the letters that Hepburn and Dredge Park write to each other?
No, not at all.
So Reg, when he was working up towards his £500 bench, so Reg being the first bodybuilder to bench
500 lbs, Hepburn being the first weightlifter to do it, Reg was actually getting instruction from
Hepburn on how to get his bench up.
And one of the points, I believe it's in one of these letters that Hepburn makes is that he
recommends separating his his squat from his pressing and that having them both on the same day,
like, yes, you know, he has done in the past, but it can be detrimental.
And so it's interesting to me seeing that we're seeing the same thing here where the squat is taken
away from everything else.
Yeah, I mean, exactly.
And that's, I think that's why powerlifting routines do tend to diverge a little bit from
bodybuilding ones because you need that kind of lack of fatigue around each lift that you're
competing in to be able to maximize the coordination games.
You can't, you can't just kind of go, oh, well, I'm just going to do everything three times a week
all in the same workout.
And you're kind of there for an hour and a half or whatever, you know, battling your way through all
three lifts.
And by the time you get to the end, you're just kind of in bits and you just don't really want to
kind of focus on that thing.
Whereas if you separate out and you start having a day when you can go in and tackle squat first
day, another day you can tackle bench first, then you start to actually get those coordination
improvements occurring, you know, and they are technical lifts.
So, yeah, I mean, I think that that's a separate conversation.
But ultimately I think that's why why coordination, you know, kind of is king in those in those
situations.
But no, just there's a bodybuilding, which is what we're we're really kind of focused on.
It's really striking that this, you know, this routine, although it is a, you know, designed to help
him succeed in this sport of, of Olympic weightlifting, although Olympic weightlifting as it was
then, not as it is now, you know, with the overhead press in place, you know, clearly just fits
very, very well with the volume and frequency kind of parameters that we're seeing in the silver
era, which is, you know, training three times a week, you know, doing a couple of sets of, you know,
in this case, lower reps because he's training for strength.
But yeah, volume and frequency is bang on.
It's really remarkable.
Yeah.
And it's so interesting to me that on that squad day, sometimes he says to me a single set, right?
Like he was theoretically doing a single set of two repetitions.
And no one can argue that he wasn't able to build tremendous amounts of muscle in his legs from.
And as you keep saying, this is pre steroids, this is literally like there's no other way of doing
it.
And I think this is the problem when people say, oh, you know, well, you know, the best bodybuilders
today are doing, you know, kind of, you know, a billion sets of, of, of kind of chest work every
Monday.
And that's how they're, that's how they're getting, that's how they're getting huge.
I'm like, no, it's not.
They're getting huge by using enormous amounts of pharmaceuticals.
It's got absolutely zero to do with the training.
So I think this is the problem.
You've, I think we've still got people who believe that it's relevant to comment on what the biggest
people on the planet are doing right now.
It is not relevant.
You talk to a pharmacist if you want to understand what the biggest people on the planet right now,
you do not talk to because it's irrelevant.
It is literally irrelevant.
Yeah, I told everyone to be.
Disingenuous, incredibly disingenuous for people to go around saying, oh, look at this bodybuilder
right now, they're really big and they're doing this silly training routine.
I don't care.
I literally don't care.
You might as well be telling me what they ate for breakfast is absolutely irrelevant.
It is not even, I'm not interested.
It has nothing to do with how big they are at all.
I can't get my mind around when people kind of seem to think that it's a relevant data point.
It's not.
I mean, if somebody believes otherwise, then please make the case and I'm happy to kind of engage
with that.
But right now I just look at everything pre steroid is, is is following the same pattern.
People are training three times a week with low volumes.
I mean, it's multiple steps removed anyway.
Like if you think about obviously, what I love about some of this pre story era stuff is that there
was such a small pool of people who were lifting at that point, right?
Like people were coming to weightlifting and they didn't even know what weights were.
And so, you know, what we see is when there was a a small group of people doing this thing, what
worked for this, you know, group of people nowadays, we have every single person has tried
weightlifting at some point in their life and has had a gym membership.
And to now say, well, let's look at these genetic elites.
Let's look, you know, the the best bodybuilder in the world now and try to draw conclusions from
what they're doing.
It's like, well, OK, we are now looking at such a genetic outlier, it's not even funny.
And then on top of that, we've got the drug issue.
It's like there's like none of that.
Well, actually you've got you've got you've got a third thing, which is the interaction effect.
So you could have somebody who's got amazing genetics for strength training, but absolutely horrific
genetics for responsiveness to Rolex.
And you could have somebody who's got relatively kind of moderate or poor kind of responsiveness to
strength training, but grows like a weed when they start taking antibiotics or any other
pharmaceutical.
I mean, we've been talking offline about all the other crazy stuff that people are doing at the
moment.
I mean, it is it it becomes a science experiment in, in in the worst sense of the word.
And I think ultimately what we need to get away from if we want to move forward is the understanding
that you literally cannot use anecdotes of people who are currently training as rather as relevant.
You can use your own anecdotes to inform your own training, Of course.
I mean, you should do that.
But when you when you say, oh, so and so is doing this and they're huge, I'm like, OK, and why are
you telling me that?
It's totally irrelevant.
It doesn't mean anything.
Yeah, So I forget what let us down that that little Grant Anderson, his plan looks the same as the
bodybuilders.
Yeah.
It does, it does it's, it's a high, it's a high, high frequency.
And actually it's really cool that he's doing that upper lower, not perfectly upper lower, but he's
splitting out his lifts, you know, six days a week so that he can minimize intercession fatigue and
maximize his coordination improvements and those exercises that he's trying to excel then.
So really he's, he's absolutely nailing it from, from a kind of, you know, sort of fatigue
management point of view for the purposes of what he's trying to achieve.
Yeah, I think there's some cool things happening as well.
Like if you look at the exercise order, you know, we've got the on that Monday with the multiple
exercises.
Obviously the squat data is on your squat, but on the other day we've got the upper body exercises
first and then going into these sort of more full body, lower body type exercises which are going to
be more cardiovascularly demanding.
So I think there's some.
Intelligence, but I think also also you wouldn't you wouldn't want to do you wouldn't want to do
your your kind of dead lifting stuff before you did your overhead brushing because your back
wouldn't be able to give you the support that you needed.
Yeah, but even the snatch and the clean and you know, all these multiple singles that he's got in
there, these are coming after like I think there's a quite a few cool things happening in this.
One thing I wanted to mention, I forgot he so obviously this squat, you know, I've made the comment
a couple of Times Now that he was just doing, you know, a couple of sets of two repetitions and
obviously grew like a weed.
If you look at his legs.
Now you've made the comment that a lot of these mirrors exactly what we would expect to see from
silver, your bodybuilders, just with different exercise selection.
One thing that I don't know if I've talked about this on this podcast or not before, and perhaps I
have, but Reg Park, obviously Reg was known for, you know, largely doing these sets of five.
And and, you know, people would kind of mistakenly say five sets of five, but the first two sets
were were kind of warm up sets.
And so three sets of five.
But in one of Reg's advanced Mr. Universe plans, he actually did double s for his bench.
And that's something I always found very interesting.
And I suspect it may be because obviously he's got a propensity there for heavy benching because he
obviously worked up to doing a £500 bench.
But interesting that such an advanced bodybuilder like Grinch was actually potentially doing just
double s phase bodybuilding work.
And you know, this idea that you need, you know, as you said, multiple sets, higher reps like you
can in fact grow a lot of muscle doing a couple of sets of two repetitions, can't you?
Yeah.
I mean we actually did an entire podcast on a recent study where they compared doing heavier loading
protocols and achieved the same growth as moderate load protocols when the same number of sets were
done in each session.
I'm just looking to see if I can find which episode it was when we did that full study breakdown.
Can't find it now.
Without any sets of, was it 3 to 5?
Yeah, it was three to five.
It was 3 to 5 reps.
It was a three to five Rep Max or five Rep Max ish kind of loading episode #27 we called it our 4
reps optimal new study.
So episode 27, we did a whole episode talking about how you can train using heavier loads and
basically get pretty much the same muscle.
And I think, I mean, I've, I've deferred to what I said in that episode, but I suspect that from
memory, it will come down to you getting approximately the same numbers stimulating reps, maybe 1-1
less or so here and there.
But ultimately, you're getting higher recruitment gains as a result of craning with those heavier
loads.
So you kind of end up getting probably a better end result in the long term because you get access
to more muscle fibers and even if it takes you slightly longer to get there, you'll get to a better
place, better place, a more advanced level of muscle.
So yeah, really, really kind of cool to see that heavier loading, you know, as you say, being being
used in bodybuilding situations even back then.
We expect to see it with Anderson because obviously he's competing in, in the ability to lift those
those numbers, but it's called to see it in the bodybuilding space as well.
Because it does confirm again, you know, that we're we're matching Physiology and strength science
now with what the silver era we're doing.
And that's really the essence of this podcast is just to say, you know, the arrival of anabolics
just means that all data regarding what people are doing in strength training context is irrelevant
from like 1955 to 60 onwards.
I mean, everything that people did after that you can just ignore.
You have to go back and look at what people were doing prior to that to understand how things
actually could work in practice, and it just matches with what physiologically I see happening in
literature, so.
So online at the moment, there's been a resurgence.
I don't know if I can even say resurgence because I don't know if it ever disappeared, But this
whole topic of volume and frequency and how much volume do you need is volume King.
Oh God, that used to be that used to be my freaking mantra.
That was what was nailed into us when I was a PT, learning from some of these older sources, volume
is king and you just drive up volume over time constantly.
I remember learning that was the the difference between like when you have an advanced lifter, the
only thing you need to do differently is to just drive up volume.
And you just put it over years and just every year you just make sure they're doing more volume.
And this seems to, you know, as much as we've talked about it and tried to clear some of these up,
it seems to be a continual topic of how many sets does one need?
Is volume the main driver?
Is frequency even important?
Is it just about spreading out your volume?
I think we should start asking people, when they start asking these questions about volume, we
should say to them, are you planning on being bigger and stronger than Paul Anderson?
Because, because, because if you're not, if you're not, if your goal is less lofty than Paul
Anderson, then maybe you could do his program or slightly less and you would get to your goals.
Or any of.
The, you know, I'm just, I'm just picking him because we've talked about it today.
But you know, honestly, it's like, you know, do you have loftier goals for your strength and size
than, you know, Paul Anderson?
Because if you if you do that, maybe, yeah, you could consider doing a bit more volume.
You're happy, you're happy with his levels of strength and muscle mass.
Then maybe you could just do what he did or something, you know, more bodybuilding specific, which
would be along the same lines.
You know, and you get to you get to that level, maybe not because obviously he's genetically very
talented and dedicated man, but and ultimately the point stands, which is that clearly that was
achievable with an incredibly low volume program.
You made a point a moment ago, you talked about the stimulating graphs, like matching stimulating
graphs.
I think when you were talking in that study that we discussed, so 27, and just to quickly lean into
that for a moment, people look at plans because a lot of people, I don't know if you get questions
like this, I get questions like this a lot.
You know, what if I want to get stronger and I want to build muscle or what if I want to get good at
the power lift?
But I wanted a hypertrophy plan.
You know, there's more power building type stuff.
And you look at this plan from Anderson, he was resting, you know, 10 minutes between these sets.
Like these workouts would have been monstrous workouts just in terms of duration.
Yeah, but you've made this point that, hey, it's really, from a Hypertroy perspective, it's about
stimulating repetitions.
And if you're doing 2 sets of two repetitions, you know that's really gonna equal what you're gonna
get out of a standard.
Set it is more or less it's gonna be the set.
Well with the recruitment benefits.
I mean, if you compare A10 Rep Max, which is kind of what we send tend to see a lot of the silver
area doing because they don't want to do too much warmer, then, you know, 10 Rep Max is probably
going to give you the same stimulating effect.
AS2 double s, I think just because of the recruitment being higher in the in the in the heavier load
Rep ranges more or less.
I mean, OK, maybe it's slightly less, but yeah, I mean exactly.
That's literally the same thing as doing a silver era bodybuilding routine where you're doing a
single set have a bunch of exercises three times a week.
That's the whole point.
They're they're literally pretty much physiologically identical.
So you can just grab one of those exercises, choose two different exercises, one or two exercises
per workout that you know that you want to be working on getting that load up higher, working on
lower repetition stuff.
And then you can just do multiple sets with it.
Like that's, that's something I love programming that way for a lot of people where each workout we
might have, you know, maybe I might do an overhead press.
Is that sort of lift for, you know, work at A and then maybe we'll do a back exercise or a low body
exercise, work at B and we'll start with often I'll do clusters.
Yeah, it might be 5 sets of one to two repetitions.
And then we just move into single sets.
And there's no reason that you can't merge and blend these two things of doing multi sets of low
repetitions, matching the the stimulus that we've just talked about with a single set and then doing
single set to everything else.
It's just to keep it more efficient.
Yeah, totally.
And what's amazing is that if you took this out of context, like completely out of context, and you
went, you know, out into the kind of fitness industry, social media space and without referencing,
you know, so air bodybuilding, without referencing science, you literally just said, you know, hey
everyone, I'm doing a routine where I do 2 double s on these exercises.
And it might be, you know, kind of overhead press, you know, kind of a bench, kind of some kind of
stiff leg deadlift or something like that.
You know, kind of a garage gym type scenario where you've got a bunch of freeway exercises that
you're doing and you're just doing double s in those exercises.
Like a full body routine, you know, kind of three times a week.
Not actually that far away from the way that I used to train when I was doing weighted pull ups and
dips and a few other bits and pieces around the edges.
And pretty much just training with kind of, you know, a couple of reps, a couple of sets three times
a week.
And you could do that and people would be like, oh, you're never going to build muscle dinner.
Yeah, absolutely.
Yeah, they would literally, they would queue up.
They would queue up to tell you that you and they would be extremely confident that they were right
and you're wrong.
And you had to do, you know, kind of dozens of sets of, of moderate loads, otherwise you'd be
impossible for you to build muscle.
And you could literally then turn around and go, you know, the strongest man on the planet in 1956
who won a gold medal in weightlifting at the Olympics and set their world record.
At that time, he was doing pretty much exactly the same routine.
And you are telling me because of your enormous confidence in what you've seen online, you
brainwashed yourself by watching bodybuilders, You've used anabolic steroids, and you brainwashed
yourself into believing that that type of training that Paul Anson did is impossible to build muscle
using.
That's where we are.
People do not realize just how screwed up the fence industry is because of steroids.
They do not understand.
It another nod to Rob.
He actually sent me a post today of a fairly large account of someone who's enhanced and been very
obviously enhanced.
And the post had said that you can't, you can, you can maybe maintain, but you can't build muscle
with less than five to six sets a week.
And then it said to build muscle you need, I think it was 10/9 to 20 sets I think it said and I.
Mean Rob, Rob, Rob has an inbuilt nonsense seeking engine.
He's sending me all kinds of it.
Does he's like a lady hates taking myself and nonsense isn't he?
But yeah, it's again, people just don't understand how frequency is working in this in this
situation or how stimulating reps are working in this situation.
So they kind of like they just think about total volume across the week as if as if the body knows
what a week is.
I mean, come on.
So let's let's dive into that.
And I think something that's helpful to understand or think about or change your way of looking at
things is that a set, a set of stimulus is basically 5 stimulating repetitions.
And I think that's really helpful when you're looking at sets maybe a lower than 5 repetitions or
even I guess if you're looking at high Rep sets as well.
Ultimately, when we're talking about diminishing returns off sets, we're kind of talking about these
bundles of about 5 stimulating repetitions, aren't we?
So, and if we're talking about one set of two sets, whatever, and we've just talked about doing
singles or double repetitions, OK, that's like 2 reps is just under half of a single set.
Yeah.
So for me that that was a really helpful basic shift I made a couple of years ago when I realized,
OK sets stimulus in a set, we're just talking basically about 5 stimulating repetitions regardless
of how you slice and dice it.
Yeah, pretty much.
I mean, I think you can, you can do that.
I mean, but ultimately you know where we where we need to go and we've done, we've done these kind
of analysis before.
So I think what we're going to do today is just run through a couple of really important concepts
that we've covered before on this podcast.
I was going to bring them all together and just line them up and talk about why the Physiology is,
as we understand it, fits perfectly with silver era bodybuilding, build bodybuilding programming,
and obviously therefore also with what you know, Anderson was doing in his weightlifting programming
as well.
Now after we've done this podcast, if people want us to go back over any of the individual elements
and do like bigger expansion of those concepts, we're happy to do that, but we have done them
before, so we're just going to kind of run through them today.
So what we're going to do is start with the fundamentals of what is happening in a workout as
regards dose response.
So when we say dose response, what we mean is as you add on more sets or stimulating reps, you can
do it either way.
As you add on more stimulus across a workout for a particular muscle group, what you're going to
find is you have a non linear relationship.
So you cannot.
And this basically comes from two key sources.
You've got Bradshinfeld's Metro analysis from, I forget the date 20/17/2018 and then you've got the
Pelland metro analysis from last year, 25 S Both of those are nonlinear responses.
What that means is that each additional set does not give you the same stimulus as the earliest sets
that you've just done.
So what we can do is for ease of numbers, what you can do is you can say that I'm going to define my
first set as 100% of a first set stimulus.
That's just axiomatic.
I'm just saying that one SEC, my first set is 100% of my first set, which is very straightforward.
What you can then do is look at the stimulus of your second, third, fourth, fifth sets relative to
that original set.
And what you'll find is that each extra set gives you a smaller percentage as in less than 100%.
Now this is literally just reading numbers off those two kind of metro analysis.
Now you have to do an adjustment for the Chamfer one because he did a linear count, 2 linear lines
instead of creating a kind of a curve.
But you can impose a curve on top of those and basically get to an answer.
So essentially, I think you've got the numbers in front of you.
So correct me where I go wrong, but basically when we look at, if we start with with Brad's numbers,
then essentially your, your first set obviously is 100%.
Your second set is going to be 39% of your first set, which is obviously an enormous step down
straight away, an enormous step down from your first set to your second set.
Your third set is then going to give you, I'm trying to read off the chart here.
Can you help me out?
22 percent, 22 percent, 22% and then where do we go from 22% for four set?
Yeah.
So 4 set is then 16%.
And then it is it 13%?
13 for the 5th set.
Yeah.
So basically based on the metro analysis that Brad did, you can plot a line that will tell you that
you have absolutely no business doing four or five sets at all in your workout is literally you
might as well just go home and do something else.
So really three sets turns that to be something probably where you're going to want to stop.
But the reality is first set to second set, you're dropping from 100% down to 40% or 39%.
It's literally that second set is really kind of like an optional extra.
And 3rd set is like, OK, really if you've got capacity, kind of why we always go, you're much better
off choosing different exercises rather than kind of focusing on the same exercise all the time
because you're you're dropping down dramatically if you're using the Schoenfeld metric.
If we look at the Pelham Metro analysis, the number is a lot less dramatic.
I think we go from first set, we go for the second set is 80 is 82%.
Yeah.
Second set is sorry, third set is 68 is 60.
868 and then 57%.
OK, cool.
So again, we're dropping down not as dramatically, but you still are dropping down.
So what's common between these two metro analysis is that you're definitively not able to get as
much stimulus in your second and third and 4th and first steps as you are in your first set.
First set basically is the thing that makes all the difference.
So that is that's, and just to be clear, these are the only data that we've got.
So when somebody is and, and let me just go down a very, very quick rabbit hole because what we're
seeing at the moment is people, influencers who are actually very good at what they do.
And this is kind of why we're talking about this today.
Because most of the time when we see stuff online, like when Rob sends us stuff and it's complete
nonsense, I just kind of laugh and ignore it because I'm like, I don't care what these people are
saying.
They don't, they don't have any, you know, kind of meaningful influence over the, the intelligent
part of the industry.
But when you see somebody actually knows what they're doing, saying things like the data say, and
then they don't specify what data.
Now, just to be clear, I think we've got a referencing problem in general on social media because
there's no space to say anything.
We don't.
It's not like when I used to write long articles, you could hyperlink, you know, kind of pub Med
stuff all the way through and you get a really nice analysis that people could go through and kind
of pick apart and it's great.
But nobody reads those things.
So everybody's, including me, have stopped doing them.
And so what's happened is we've kind of gone to social media and you end up in a situation where
sometimes you get a citation and even then it's like you can't click on it because it's not
clicking, you can't click through and it's, it's just messy.
It's really difficult to do.
Now, I try and give actual citations written on the infographics that I do everything that I do.
And obviously when I do FAQs, I have a bit of text and then I have an infographic which has the
citation.
So I'm trying to do my best to give people ways of checking everything that I say.
And when I say, you know, physiologically this is what's happening, you can just go to the FAQ and
see why I think think that.
I mean, it's like everything is cross referenced.
So but when people say there's data data, the data don't show that or you know, I don't think that's
what's happening.
And then they don't give you any way of going down like their chain of reasoning to find out why
they think that.
I think that's unhelpful.
So I think what we've got to do is be specific about what data it is that we're referring to.
So in this context, when I say the dose response is clearly non linear such that the first set of
every workout is substantially better.
I mean in Schoenfeld's kind of data you've obviously got 100% going down to 39% for your second set.
That's enormous.
Palin obviously is 82%.
So, you know, not anywhere near a severe, but still very, very clearly worse.
Those are the only data that exist.
So when somebody says, oh, no, there isn't a nonlinear response, it's it's linear.
I'm like, based on what data?
There's no data that show that literally doesn't exist.
There is literally nothing.
I mean, often an exercise science, you can say, well, this data I'm using or I think this data is
relevant and we can argue about whether the data is relevant.
This is cut and dry.
There's literally no other data.
So those responses are non linear.
You can't get.
So all, all the data says really that first sets is, is definitely the most effective stimulus in
the workout.
Yeah, and, and, and when people want, and again, if people want to argue whether it's palind or
Schenfelt, I think that it's important to look at, you know, why those two studies show different
results.
I I believe very firmly that the reason that the palind data shows a skewed benefit in favour of
higher volumes is because of the studies, because every metro analysis is literally only as good as
the studies it includes.
And the problem with the Pelham 1 is not anything to do with the way the study was done.
It's great study that, you know, they did a great job.
The problem is that the studies that included since the Schenberg was published, most people who
have been studying volume have been doing really, really excessive volume studies.
So they've just been going up to crazy numbers and when you go up to crazy numbers of volume, you
end up with crazy amounts of muscle swelling and you start to distort the top end of the volume
curve.
So it looks like you're getting super amounts of muscle growth and actually just getting super
amounts of swelling.
I know that the swelling argument is kind of ongoing.
People are still denying it.
I just keep coming back to the fact that we've only got 1 good long term training study which
actually measured muscle growth separately from swelling.
Now you know, people are running around posting studies online saying oh, this study shows that no
swelling.
I'm like no it doesn't.
What you have to do is go and look at Cody Horn study in extreme volume and see that when he ducts
intracellular and extracellular water from the lean mass changes, you get a substantial reduction in
the amount of muscle growth that is appearing in those scenarios.
That's the only long term study that exists that has deducted muscle swelling and it actually didn't
deduct all of it only deducted the extracellular.
It didn't take the intracellular.
So that is the only step that exists.
And it shows that when you do high volume training, you have a seriously enormous muscle swelling
effect that skews the data in favor of that protocol.
It makes it look a lot better than it actually is.
So when you look at the pelland date, when you go OK, so the pelland is showing way less reduction
in muscle growth as you go from set to set to set.
And it's because the top end of the curve is getting pulled upwards by these silly volume studies
that have used extremely high volumes that have created muscle swelling, proving, not proving story
displaying or making it seem like muscle growth is happening at super high volumes when it's
actually not.
And that skews the entire curve upwards and makes it looks deeper than it actually should be.
So I'm definitely biased in favor of the Schoenfeld numbers.
I think they're much more likely to be real.
The even looking at them surprises me that they're so low as you go to higher and high volumes.
But that's literally what the data say.
And that's the best data I think we've got.
If you want to make a case for why muscle swelling is not happening in the Schoenfeld, sorry, I'm
not lapping in the Pelland.
I think you're going to be struggling because there is no other data other than the code you want
study.
But you know, honestly either study show that the dose response is definitely non linear.
Therefore the first set is always going to be better than every other set.
That's kind of where we start from.
Yeah.
So if you were going to go off the Scheinfeld data, then in a very sort of simplistic way, you could
look at that and say that that second set is going to give you roughly half as much, half the
stimulus of the first set and that third set roughly half of that second set.
And then anything beyond that is relatively meaningless.
Pretty much.
I mean I think anybody is doing more than three sets on an exercise and the workout is absolutely
wasting their time.
I mean, I think there's, there's just no point in doing that unless they are doing like a strength
protocol where they're doing, you know, kind of singles or double s or even triples.
And then, OK, then then you can do double.
I mean, you can go to five and six.
And I mean, I kind of, I mean, people know that I did that burn routine of eight sets of 2 rising to
three.
In retrospect, I feel that I was probably two or three sets too many.
I think a protocol of five sets of double s rising rising to triples is probably going to be a lot
better over the long term.
Yeah, that's how I feel as well.
I think that eight sets, you know, those first 2-3 sets, warm up sets and then those five working
sets, that's what I would normally program as well for someone of those goals.
So again, if we're looking at this saying, you know, one set, 2 sets, three sets, we're talking like
that, that sort of let's say the the two sets being like maybe that greatest return on investment.
We're talking about 10 simulating repetitions there give or take.
Like obviously, you know, fatigue is going to play a bit of a role in, OK, are we losing 1 Rep and
that second set, whatever.
Yeah.
But if we're again going to try to look at how do we use low Rep protocols to match this, we're
going to look at getting about 10 stimulating repetitions.
Yeah, exactly.
So the next step then is to say, well, OK, if, if we've got a dose response, which is happening at
the workout level and it's happening at the workout level because of the mechanisms that are driving
it.
So it's happening because your muscle fibers are growing in the kind of 48 hours post workout.
And ultimately that, that, that process can only really go up to a certain limit.
So we make new proteins by elevating the rate of muscle protein synthesis.
And you can only really elevate them transiently up to a certain point.
The, the, the machinery that makes new proteins can have it only go up to a certain rate of making.
So you can't just kind of dial the kind of the, the, the knob up to 11.
It doesn't go that far.
You can get, you get up to 10 and it stops.
It's like there's a limit to how far you can actually go when you're making those new proteins.
So essentially what's happening as you kind of stimulate take that hypertrophy, you telling the
fibers to grow, telling them to grow again in that same kind of 48 hour window is only going to have
a progressively smaller and smaller effect as you kind of do additional kind of stimulating reps
also you've got the fatigue happening.
So as you create some fatigue, you're going to then inhibit the fiber from experiencing as much
stimulus either on the recruitment side by CNS fatigues or on the peripheral side by calcium I'm
related fatigues.
So ultimately, and there's a limit to how much we can actually drive muscle growth in each workout,
both on the stimulus side and also on the fatigue side.
So what we're going to aim for then is doing multiple workouts per week.
So if you train every kind of other day or three times a week, you're going to get more of your
first sets, you're going to process that stimulus and you're going to come back and you're going to
do it again.
It is mathematically impossible for somebody to beat 3 * a week frequency with two times or one
time.
It just isn't possible.
I mean, this literally the dose response relationship is what defeats pretty much any argument
against a higher frequency protocol of three times or every other day.
So, but what do we see people actually saying?
And what we see people saying, on the one hand, they say, you know, oh, look, here is some kind of
long term training data and we're going to argue that that long term training data supports the fact
that frequency doesn't matter.
Or they say, oh, look at this and they say metro analysis, but they don't mean metro analysis.
What they mean is network analysis.
So let's just look at those two things, you know, kind of and see where people's arguments are
coming from.
So firstly, they look at the long term training data and what they'll do is they'll post up some
selective interpretation or what they'll say is, Oh well, there's no study that shows that there are
significant differences between two times a week and three times a week frequency.
That's what they'll do and that's selective.
So essentially what they're doing is they're trying to get you to focus on, you know, 1 fact rather
than taking the entire picture of the literature as a whole.
So what I did when this a rich original argument came around because we've done an entire podcast on
this exact question.
What I did was I literally just said, look, here are all of the trained subject kind of actually, I
think I maybe did bigger analysis.
I think I maybe covered the untrained ones as well, but I don't remember.
Basically, I just kind of did a table and I said, look, here are all the relevant studies of all the
frequency and comparisons between 1:00 and 2:00, between 2:00 and 3:00 and between 1:00 and 3:00.
I think I ignored the ones that are doing like 5-4 times a week, five times a week, 6 * a week.
I kind of.
So basically when you look at that data, what you find is that there are significant differences
between 1:00 and 3:00, but there aren't significant differences between 1:00 and 2:00 and 2:00 and
3:00.
So essentially when people say look, there are no significant differences between two and three
times a week, what they're not telling you that there also aren't differences between 1:00 and 2:00.
So every time somebody stands in front of the camera as they are often want to do, and they say, Oh
well, no, I don't accept the people who have arguing the figures.
That makes a difference because I looked at the data and it shows that there's no significant
differences between 2:00 and 3:00.
That's incredibly disingenuous because you could literally film the same video and say there's no
difference between 1:00 and 2:00.
So therefore I'm going to do one time a week.
If you're going to stand there and claim that you're doing 2 * a week because there's no differences
between 2:00 and 3:00, then I can literally ask you to do the same video of you telling me why
you're going to train one time a week because it's the same as 2.
And we yet we know that one is not as good as three because they literally have got data showing
that one is not as good as 3.
So I don't understand where people's kind of thought processes are going with this other than to
assume that they're they're acting in bad faith because you literally can't make a case for two
being better than anything.
It's clearly not, you know, because there's no significant, significant differences between 1:00 and
2:00.
So how, how are you making the claim that it's worth, you know, kind of that it's as good as three?
It's, it's very strange.
It's like it's, it's literally just selective, selectively showing a set of data and not taking in
context.
That's the problem.
That's what we're seeing.
So the way I read it is that, you know, the just there aren't big enough differences apparent in the
literature between 1:00 and 2:00 and between 2:00 and 3:00, but you just scale from 1/3 to three.
I mean, that's, that would be the most obvious interpretation for me.
And I think the reason that's happening is because muscle swelling is creating a problem in those
data sets.
So if we look at if we look at why muscle swelling is creating a problem, if you look at volume,
generally speaking, you're always going to find a bigger muscle growth effect of doing higher volume
training.
Now that's not just because you're getting more muscle growth, it's also because you're getting more
swelling.
If I have three groups and I give them a low, medium and high volume kind of kind of workouts, then
what I'll see is like a progressive increase in volume in hypertrophy, sorry, muscle growth, muscle
size increases, sorry, across the three volume tiers.
And a chunk of that will be swelling, and a chunk of that will be hypertrophy.
OK.
So when we're looking at the volume literature, muscle swelling effects are magnifying the
differences between groups.
Yeah.
So we've always got a problem that the swelling is making the group big group differences bigger.
So every time you go looking for differences between groups when you've got different volume tiers,
you are more likely to find them when swelling is present rather than less likely to find them when
swelling is present.
In contrast, if you volume match three frequency groups and you do one time a week, 2 times a week,
and three times a week, but you have all of them doing the same weekly volumes, now you're going to
get the same swelling across the three groups, but you're going to get differences in terms of the,
you know, kind of overall muscle growth.
So your frequencies that are higher will get more muscle growth, but they'll get the same kind of
amount of swelling approximately across the week, maybe a little bit.
That's assuming that the volumes are undercoverable.
I mean, yeah, I mean, obviously when you look at the frequency comparisons where volumes are
recoverable, what you tend to find is that you get a lot less.
You actually get differences between groups.
I mean, if you look at the frequency studies that have shown differences between frequencies,
generally speaking, the volumes are recoverable.
When you start to push into frequency studies where the volumes are not recoverable, then you end up
in a situation where you've got muscle swelling in the groups.
And actually, to be fair, I could make a case even stronger and I could say you'll get more muscle
swelling depending on where the measurements are taken.
You'll get more muscle swelling in the groups that are doing a lower frequency because you test the
muscle size.
If you test the muscle size the same number of days after each workout.
If I do, like if I do nine sets on one day and then I test treat my muscle size 3 days later or two
days later, I'm going to have a muscle swelling effect from doing that nine sets.
If I'm doing three sets of three set three times a week, then I'm not less likely to get a swelling
effect after my three set protocol then I would have to my 9 set protocol.
So the reality is that the higher frequencies will have more muscle swelling and therefore you'll
actually, I can make the case even stronger and I could say look, you know, if you're doing higher
volume per workout, lower frequency, you can have a bigger muscle swelling effect.
It's going to counterbalance the the greater hypertrophy that you're getting with the higher
frequency.
So the reality is that, you know, frequency is working in the opposite direction for sorry, muscle
swelling is working in the opposite direction for frequency.
It masks differences between groups.
Muscle swelling is working for the differences between groups on the on the volume side.
So you end up with greater belief that your volumes matter and a smaller belief that your
frequencies matter.
And that's where we are at the moment.
The industry basically believes that frequency doesn't matter, which is insane when you think about
it.
Like, OK, fine, yeah, go and do 400 sets in one workout and get back to me.
Like tell me that you can do that and like, like, not train for the rest of the month.
I mean, like, people aren't thinking properly.
Frequency clearly doesn't matter.
It's just when it matters is what we're arguing about.
You know, So what we're saying is that we think that the stimulus period is about 48 hours long,
which is what, you know, we can go into that in a minute.
But ultimately what I'm saying here is that muscle swelling is making volume tears look bigger,
more, look like they are more different from each other than they really are, and it's making
frequency tears a lot less different than they really are.
Now, one of the arguments I hear from people online when they usually hear you say that is, Oh no,
we have no, no evidence that higher volumes cause more swelling than low volumes do well.
We do the Cody Horn shut The study showed that because.
It is the only Hardy that's actually.
Measured volume because they measured increases in volume across a 5 or 6 week.
I forget how many weeks.
Think it's six week and it was 2.
Three, yeah.
Yeah.
So the two three-week blocks and they increased volume progressively over the course of that three,
those 2-3 week blocks.
So on volume and swelling continues to increase across all six weeks.
So they're increasing volume and they're literally getting more and more swelling as they go through
that six week period.
That's the only study that you've got that actually compare that actually measured simultaneously
whole muscle size and the contribution of muscle swelling to whole muscle size.
There isn't another study.
So you've got studies that people have done where they've, you know, tested temporary increases in
muscle size after a workout at different time points.
And some of those show, I mean like the data I've collected across the, I think I don't know, maybe
8 studies show that basically every single study that's ever been done in trained people where
they've done a bunch of different kind of bunch of sets and then tested post workout muscle
swelling, it always comes out as between kind of 1 or 2% and 8% around about the two or the three
day mark, which is usually when you're measuring muscle size after a, after a, the end of the
strength training program.
So, and when you consider that differences between groups in, you know, kind of most hypertrophy
studies aren't much more than that.
You, you kind of basically saying that you could, you could find that if you're comparing 1 damaging
protocol with one less damaging protocol, then most of the differences could be swelling, you know,
even in your trained people, you know, because as I say, all the studies that I've put together were
in trained people.
So, so, yeah, I mean, I think again, when when this is the problem that we've got, I think, well, I
not the problem I've got because I'm not really trying to kind of, you know, persuade anybody in
particular.
But the problem that you will you will come into contact with on social media.
If you want to use social media as a source of information, which is I think dubious best.
But if you want to use social media as a source of information, like people say to me all the time,
oh, I learned this and I learned that and I learned this from this person.
Like really?
Is that what you call it learning?
Is that?
Is that what you think you're doing?
OK, interesting.
So you're absorbing information from them or opinions from them is probably a more accurate way of
just growing it.
So you're absorbing opinions from them with rationalisations behind them.
And those opinions and rationalisations that you're absorbing have come from selective information
provision.
So like I said a minute ago, when somebody says stands in front of the camera and go, I've not seen
any differences between, you know, kind of any study showing there's a difference between two and
three times a week.
And you've absorbed that information, you've internalized that and you've gone, oh, that means
there's no difference between two and three times a week.
What you haven't seen is the data they haven't shown you.
The problem is that human beings have this thing which is called what you see is all there is.
So basically your brain assumes that all the information that's in front of you right now is all the
information that's necessary to answer the question now without doing.
You know, I do this on the podcast with Rob, and I sometimes start having a conversation with him in
the middle of a podcast, but without doing that again, before we jumped on the podcast today, I was
kind of chatting with you just, you know, kind of casually about the problem that I see with large
language models and artificial intelligence.
And the problem basically that I see or obviously is hundreds of problems and they're all working on
solving them.
But the problem that I see that is interesting is that the aloft, often the large language model
will focus on only the information that's right in front of it to answer the question you asked it
to answer.
And it won't actually reference information that is peripheral or next door to it.
That is actually very, very relevant.
And it's, and I would propose the reason for that is not because the AI is flawed, it's because the
AI is actually trained on human data.
So it's literally just replicating what we do or what people do.
So I think what's happening is that when, when somebody is sitting in front of the, you know, kind
of mobile phone and absorbing opinions from influencers on, on TikTok or, or Instagram or wherever,
what they're doing is they're taking the information in front of them and their brain is going, this
is the only information that matters.
This thing that this person tell me right now is the only thing that matters.
And they don't take a moment and go, what other information could be relevant here?
Because this person is telling me that there's no significant differences in any study between two
and three times a week.
Therefore, I can do 2 times a week and it's just me just as good as someone doing 3 * a week.
I'm like, OK, what other information matters?
Have they told you about the significant differences between one time a week and two times a week or
one time a week and three times a week?
Have they told you about how those data are collected and how metro analysis are done, you know,
kind of on those areas, areas?
Have they told you about, you know, how the Physiology works?
And they're not talking about any of that because it's a 32nd clip on Instagram or on Tiktok or
wherever.
And so they're just making a point to get people to engage with them.
So if we want to actually arrive at an answer, we have to do a lot more work than just absorbing
someone's opinion on Tiktok, I think.
Yeah, which is obviously very difficult if people don't want to be.
Exactly, exactly.
And so, you know, this brings me back to the point that we mentioned about, you know, when when
people are referencing data.
So there's this tendency for people to influencers to say, OK, fine, you know, all the data I've
seen mean that this happens, but they don't tell you what data they've actually looked at.
And again, your brain kind of goes, what you see is all there is and they've looked at everything.
Therefore, you know, there isn't anything else to to argue about.
And it's like, well, hang on a minute, you know, let's do a let's do a kind of a check and see what
data is relevant.
SO11 of the same.
What a linked kind of problem that I see is when people will share a graph and they won't reference
where the graphs come from and they won't tell you how it's been made.
They'll just show you like there's a very famous graph with orange and yellow bars on it.
Not one of mine, because I do.
I do, actually.
This is actually relevant.
When I first started doing infographics, I've never told this story.
I've never told this story anywhere.
I've told individual people this story, but I think I'm going to tell people.
I'm going to tell everybody now.
So when I first started doing infographics, I actually decided to color code my studies.
Never told anybody this.
So basically I decided I was going to color code the studies and I've actually moved away from doing
this a little bit, but you can still see the tendency in my infographics today.
I decided that I would make every single long term study in humans colour coded with red, orange and
yellow.
So if you look at my Instagram and you want to pick out the studies that are strength training
studies in humans, just go and look for orange, red and yellow and you'll see them.
If you want an animal study, it'll be purple and pink.
So generally speaking the I'm trying.
To guess the colours as you're saying the categories and I thought it was purple and blue, I was off
with that one, but.
Well, OK, so, OK, so a, an acute study, an acute study in humans.
So if it's a like a fatigue study, if if you look at the fatigue study, if you're looking for a
fatigue study in humans, it'll be blue with a little bit, sometimes there'll be a purple line to
differentiate between the groups.
So it'll be, but it'll be blue.
The overall kind of template will be blue.
So like you hear about all the way back to the beginning, very, very blue dominated graphics will be
acute studies in humans like number of reps with different kind of Rep ranges or you know, post
workout fatigue or whatever.
All of those are going to be blue dominated kind of colour palettes with a little bit of purple
there maybe some light pink, but the animal models are all very purple dominated with, you know,
kind of a little bit of pink.
Very rarely I'll do cross-sectional analysis.
So like, for example, there's some tendon stuff where you've got athletes who compete in long
distance running.
Those are all green.
So if you're any cross-sectional analysis, like comparisons between two groups, just like, you know,
do athletes who compete in long distance running have bigger tendons, Achilles tendons than athletes
who don't.
And you'll get a green colour palette and that's not very rarely do those, but that's.
So I decided to actually colour code, but I actually realized that nobody could see what I was
doing.
So nobody realized that that's what I was doing.
So I kind of started to slip away from it.
And a lot of the more recent studies have tended to kind of go into sort of different directions
with colour palettes.
But generally speaking, I I kind of have stuck with my orange, red and yellow palette for long term
strength training studies in humans.
So if you are looking on my Instagram for a long term study of sort of humans in strength training,
then it will be it will be red, yellow and orange and nothing else will be.
Thank you.
So I've never told anybody that.
So that's a brand new story for the Internet.
So you can have fun wading through my Instagram and looking at, you know, kind of the work that I've
done on that.
But that's that was a decision I made right at the beginning and I stuck with it for a very long
time and nobody noticed.
So kind of gave up, but anyway, where, where we were going back?
You're talking about the the carrier image.
Yeah.
So there's a very famous, very famous sort of graph that people throw around based on the Courier
network analysis.
Now, we did an entire podcast on this last summer where we basically explained what that network
meta analysis is doing and why you probably need to be a bit more cautious than is, you know, the
norm when interpreting the results.
A meta analysis, what it does, it takes a group of studies which have all assessed the same
question.
They've all assessed, you know, what is the difference in, say, for example, training frequency
between, you know, kind of low frequencies and high frequencies.
So you take a couple of groups that are doing different training frequencies and you say, you know,
OK, what is the muscle growth that happens in each of those two groups?
And then you group all of those studies together and you do an effect size calculation for each
study.
And then what you generally do, depending on the kind of characteristics of the studies, you might
weight all of the studies equally or you might weight some of the studies and to a greater extent
depending on your confidence in their, their results.
So you can kind of do statistical kind of different, what called effects models, you can kind of do
pick and choose which of those models you think best your data best fit.
And then you can use those and you'll end up with an overall effect size for, you know, training
with different frequencies.
That's a metro analysis.
Now, the Courier metro, the Courier network analysis was not a metro analysis.
So when people say it's a metro analysis, that's not correct.
It's not, it's a, it's, I mean, depending on your terminology, but it's not, but it's not a metro
analysis in the sense that the industry thinks of as metro analysis.
It's a network analysis, which is a different thing.
What they did was basically you, you don't necessarily take studies that have compared different
frequencies.
You basically just have a load of studies which have used different frequencies and they all get
included.
So ended with loads more studies, which is why when influencers look at it, they'll go, oh, this,
this analysis included 100 studies.
I'm like, yeah, but none of them actually compared training frequencies.
And in fact, for reasons that are unknown to me, when we did the analysis on the podcast and I
actually went through every single study that went into the metro into the network analysis, they
actually missed out a bunch of important frequency studies that should have been in there.
Now, I don't know why where there was data cut off or whether it was, you know, kind of the, the,
you know, the, the search criteria or whatever, but they actually missed some of the important
frequency studies that we have in the metro analysis.
So, you know, even though it included a load of studies, actually included a load of irrelevant
studies which compared, you know, kind of control group with a higher frequency, not actually two
different frequencies at all.
So it's a network analysis, network analysis.
And I don't actually agree with people who say that that is a valid way of, you know, kind of
ascertaining effects in strength training context.
I just don't agree with them.
I don't think it's appropriate.
But anyway, it's not too much analysis.
It did include different stage and yet when people, what people will do is they'll show this kind of
graph which has no citation on it.
It's not like one of mine where I have a citation at the bottom where you can trace it back.
Literally it's just a graph of bars which shows that, you know, 2 * a week is either the same as
three times or better.
And it's like, that is incredibly in disingenuous way of presenting information because it's not
telling anybody about how the data is collected.
It's not telling them that network analysis actually excluded some important frequency study.
It's not telling them that includes studies that probably aren't relevant.
And it's just basically throwing big numbers at people and going this, this study included loads and
loads of studies.
Therefore it's really valuable and important and we should just trust what it says.
And that is incredibly disingenuous.
You know, that is not really appropriate behaviour, I don't think So what we need to do is recognize
where these data come from, be clear about where they come from and what their assumptions are
behind them because that graph is absolutely not.
I get a load of abuse online from the way that I present data.
You know, I do what I think prevents the data in the in the best possible way, but I always make it
clear where the data has come from and people can go back and check the original data because the
citation is there.
I also make notes as what my graphics infographics do.
I make notes about what like in the metro analysis, I'll say there's metro analysis included this
many studies and you know, these are the criteria and you know, so even if you don't want to go and
check the original document, you can just read off the infographic.
I present where the data come from and broadly speaking, how the data were kind of compiled.
You know, I think that's really important.
So, you know, the reason we started this podcast episode today was because you mentioned something
that had happened recently online and two of the kind of protagonists in the conflict, as it were,
One of them basically said that they didn't agree because the data didn't agree with something and
they didn't specify where the data had come from.
And the other person basically did more or less the same thing with a little bit more information,
but more or less just saying long term studies don't support that view.
And I think, you know, that's what I, I think I was trying to get out with this conversation today,
which is that, you know, when we are stating opinions about what we think is happening, I think we
need to be clearer about where we are deriving our information from.
And I'm like this entire podcast is all about, you know, kind of being clear where the information
comes from and why we think certain things.
You know, I mean, that's ultimately what we're doing today was talking about how those responses
work.
Our frequency builds on those responses.
I mean, in the only really missing piece now we've got to do is just talk about stimulus periods.
But I've been talking probably non-stop for the last 15 minutes.
So I should probably ask you what you think is going on at the moment.
It's, it's a very difficult topic.
I think like obviously the the first sets bit is relatively straightforward when you understand the
Physiology and we've done multiple episodes on it.
I think what's really difficult and what I'm finding hard to, to get my head around as to what even
suggestions to make to people is how can you discern when you are being presented or when you do
have the full picture in front of you and you do have the full data in front of you and it you're
not going to get it online.
And I don't, I just don't have good advice really give to people because you've even said they're
OK.
Well, you know, look for citations.
OK, that's all well and good.
But the amount of content creators I see who put out citations, who flash an image of a paper with a
name and then it, the study doesn't say anything that they've said it said.
And, and like so often I'll just see people come back and these are people with huge accounts.
And I'll just say things like I used wrong study, OK, that's all well and good.
But now these, you know, 10,000 people who've seen that post who aren't seeing your comments say
that you used wrong study.
They now believe that thing.
And in fact, even if they don't, even if they do see your comment now, but if you're attracted that
statement, it's still embedded in their mind.
And they, they, they still, part of them unconsciously is still going to believe that thing that
they saw the first time.
Which is why I said that the, the, the issue is not so much education.
When people say to me, oh, I've learned this from this content creator and I've learned this from
that content creator.
And I'm like, probably not.
You've probably just absorbed opinions from yeah, that's not the same thing as learning.
You know you want to learn Wade Wade through the FAQ.
But I also acknowledge it not necessarily everyone wants to learn, right?
Like some people don't.
Some people just want to know what to do and what's going to work.
And so it's a really difficult thing to kind of give advice on there because it's like, OK, if you.
Actually, that's that's that's not a problem.
Barbell strategy is not a problem.
So the barbell strategy, you take either end of the spectrum, either you just want a program that's
going to work.
OK, fine.
Well, then just go and do a silver area body building program before steroids destroy every kind of
like knowledge base that we've got in the industry.
I mean.
That's still involves a bit of confidence in what we're presenting, right?
Like, I guess you could argue that there's not any variables there to.
How many people are going to stand up and argue that stories happen?
I mean, like literally, I've done this, I've done this thought experiment before.
I keep saying to people, look, if you think that magically in the 1970s, everybody suddenly
discovered the best way to achieve muscle growth was to train with high volumes infrequently and you
know, kind of high repetition, short rest periods and all of that nonsense.
And it was just totally and utterly random and coincidental that that was precisely when they all
started hopping on dear.
And you, you want to make that case to me.
I mean, like, honestly, make that case with a straight face and and we can like have a conversation
which will mostly involve me laughing at you, but ultimately we can have that conversation.
But nobody is going to do that.
Nobody is going to go.
Do you know what?
Yeah.
It was totally coincidental that, you know, everybody trained in exactly the same way right up until
like the sort of 60s and 70s and then they all started training randomly in a different way.
But that was better.
But also, and, and this is a bit that's even more ludicrous, is also some of them did it, some of
them did the exact opposite and they also got just as good.
Results, Yeah, yeah.
It just doesn't matter at that point.
So yeah, I think the issue is that, you know, that barbell strategy, which is like the opposite
extremes actually are OK, on the one extreme, if you just want to have a good program that works,
then great.
Just go and do a silver era bodybuilding program and just forget all of this nonsense.
If you actually want to understand what's going on, you've got a lifetime of, you know, kind of
reading to do.
And I think the FAQ is a really good starting place for that.
And even if you just go through and take out the citations that I've listed and just read them and
ignore what I'm saying about them, you'll get to the pretty much the same place, I'm sure.
But you know, if you want to do it without my kind of if commentary around the edges, then fine, do
that.
But in the middle is the problem.
The middle is the problem where people kind of want to like, oh, I'm trying to find the best way and
I'm learning this from this person or not.
You're absorbing their opinions.
And the middle bit, which is where everybody is, because that's one normal distribution work, how a
normal distribution works.
Basically, the middle is the problem because everybody thinks that they know better than everybody
else, you know?
And they don't.
You know, basically the person who's at one end of the extreme, you know, who's just literally
following a silver era program and the person who's gone completely mad and spent 15 years of, you
know, working through all the data or who's just picked up my FAQ and run with it because they're
basically just outsourced their thinking to me, you know, fine, either of those two extremes is
going to work.
But the middle bit where everybody is, that's where it's not going to work because people are
assuming that they have some kind of miraculous ability to like honestly, you know, this is, this is
what is crazy.
OK, So somebody would discover, like I actually have followers who followed me for a very long time
and they will have absorbed pretty much everything that I've, I've kind of put out there.
They've been through the FAQ.
They've they literally, I see them liking every single post and every single Patreon article I
write.
And I see them often commenting and making intelligent thought kind of contributions to those.
And then suddenly out of the blue they'll say, oh, I agree with 99% of what you say, but this 1% I
agree with this other person.
I'm like, are you insane?
Are you actually insane?
You think that even after internalizing every single thing about my model, you now think you know my
model better than I do, to the point where you can find the problems with it and now incorporate
some nonsense from another creator who I've literally explained why their position is wrong multiple
times.
And you think that somehow they're right on that point and I'm not.
And you can discern that.
Really.
OK, that takes a pretty huge ego.
You know, I mean, honestly, I, I human nature is fascinating.
It's like the ability to kind of work through somebody else's model, except that it is, you know,
pretty much the best explanation or something.
But then suddenly, kind of.
So no, no, actually I somehow have now achieved the like ability to know more than you do, even
though everything I know has come from you.
Honestly, where?
Where do you?
Where do you get?
I do that very funny situation when that happens often I will get less so now, but sometimes I would
get caught up in in conversations, let's say online and you know, people will be sometimes I'll have
it where people are arguing with something that I've like content I've literally put out, or I'll
have people who are arguing with me who don't know, you know, I do a podcast with you or whatever
and they'll be like, you don't understand this at all.
You know, this is like, go look at what Chris says about this.
This means he said this is and this and they're trying to disprove what I'm saying based on your
content.
I'm like, OK, thank you for explaining to me what Chris believes because I had no idea clearly.
But I imagine what's happening in the situation is your point is it's an emotional attachment where
they've they've got this sort of one part of their existing emotional sort of belief is, is
influencing or informing part of the identity.
And your models challenge that.
And because I'll get these comments to where somebody be like, oh, I agree with everything you say,
but man, you really missed it with this one.
It's like, So what you're telling me is that this one particular topic that's actually violating
some kind of identity thing for you?
It doesn't mean the only way somebody is going to overturn my model is to go through all the
literature that I've already gone through and figure out where my interpretation has erred relative
to the underlying data.
Nobody's going to do that.
It took me 10 years.
Nobody's going to do that there.
There will be a point in the future where I'm having this argument with AI.
It's not there yet, but there will be a point in the next two or three years where I'm having this
argument with AI.
And at some point AI will will win, but we're nowhere near that point yet and we're nowhere near
with anybody else.
So, you know, I think it is, it's basically somebody will have and that emotional response will
hijack their brains ability to just sense check what they're doing.
You know, I literally cannot understand how somebody could, you know, kind of literally get all of
their model from from what I've written and then turn around and go actually, no, you're wrong here.
I'm like, are you serious?
Really.
And it's not because I won't like accept changes of opinion.
You've literally, you've literally done this on air where you've disagreed and I've been actually,
yes, you're right.
And you don't we've done it multiple times in person, you know, where you pointed out that there's
something that I've not connected in the model that I'm working with.
I'm going yeah, absolutely right.
So anyway, sorry I hijacked you again.
You were.
You were telling me what you thought.
Well, yeah, I don't even know where I was going, but I think just to finish off what you said there,
if someone does have that response, if someone if you're listening to this and and there's, you
know, whether that's, you know, Chris's model or whether that's, you know, other content that you're
engaging with and you're like, yeah, this is this all makes sense.
I agree with all of this.
And then suddenly you have that experience.
You're like, but this one thing that for me, like that's a no go.
I think that's probably a valuable invitation for you to actually examine.
Well, what is it there that you've got this emotional attachment to?
Because it's probably unlikely that that's the one thing that in fact is incorrect.
It's more likely it's probably you could use that as a mirror for yourself and see what's this thing
I'm not willing to actually go deeper with, I guess.
Very philosophical.
So.
What happened?
Yeah.
Just following on from that, what I think happens often in those scenarios, I mean, we had a very
famous, very public example of exactly what you described there.
But what sometimes what people will do when they're faced with those kind of like, oh, no, no, no,
this, this part of the model doesn't work.
I don't agree with that.
As you say, it's because emotionally they want to program in a certain way or emotionally they want
to do something that that then disagrees with.
And so they start looking for reasons why the model doesn't work.
And so essentially when we're talking about frequency, we're explaining that you've got this dose
response of kind of hypertrophy to volume, which is non linear, which means that you need more first
sets per week.
And immediately what you'll get is people going, Oh no, that's wrong because reasons.
And as I say, mostly they'll start off with long term training data.
And I've already debunked that.
Basically, they're just selectively picking either the kind of fact that, yeah, sure, there's no
significant differences between 2:00 and 3:00, but that is masking the fact that there's no
significant differences between 1:00 and 2:00 and the fact that there are between 1:00 and 3:00.
And muscle swelling is clearly causing a problem in those situations.
So again, they'll selectively pick a few studies in that or they'll reference the Courier, sorry,
network analysis again, which is irrelevant, you know.
So again, they're they're they're just basically just cherry picking the bits of data they want to
show you and your wizzy, wizzy RT, what you see is all there is will fill in the gaps and they'll
basically be hijacking your brains normal pattern recognition processes to win the argument.
But what they'll then do when you say to them, OK, yeah, but what about atrophy?
And they're going into atrophy is not a big deal.
And like, OK, well, how does the maintenance literature kind of exist then?
Because if maintenance literature, you know, kind of shows that you can do 3 or 4 search ones per
week and end up with, you know, kind of no hypertrophy across the week and you must be getting
atrophy inside a training week.
And they go, Oh no, no, that's not relevant because reasons.
I mean, it's see multiple reasons, but sometimes they'll go under.
Atrophy occurs very slowly initially and then quicker later on.
Exact opposite.
Got absolutely tons of data.
I mean, I've literally done FAQ after FAQ on this.
I've got another FAQ coming up again.
I've collected the data again because I've got even more studies.
Every bed rest study shows exponential decay in muscle growth with the fastest rate of loss
happening initially.
Every immobilization study shows the same thing.
Every animal study where they do like a protocol for creating massive muscle growth, whether it's
stretch, whether it's electrical stimulation, whatever it is, always as soon as you stop the
protocol, the muscle growth collapses initially and then settles down.
Literally every single data source source that we've got shows the same thing.
A bunch of infographics on Instagram FAQ coming soon.
So ultimately that isn't true.
And muscle growth definitely does display very quickly initially.
So that that kind of counteracts that.
And So what they've ended up, they've had to kind of move away from that and they've gone OK, well,
no, the stimulus period lasts, you know, forever or whatever, you know, it's like 72 hours or 96
hours or whatever.
And, and, and ultimately that that was a really fun kind of one because the only study that has
actually measured elevations in muscle or myophobia protein synthesis past kind of 24 hours or 28
hours, I think, no, sorry, 3132 hours.
It, it doesn't matter.
It's not, it's not past 36, definitely not, and it's certainly not 48.
Is, is, is a kicking study, which is kind of a muscle damage study, really not a strength training
study.
And and even then muscle protein synthesis doesn't really reflect, you know, the hypertrophy
stimulus anyway.
So they, they, they start really building castles on sand.
And we've got really nice data showing that the 48 hour window post workout is statistically
correlated with long term hypertrophy, suggesting that pretty much all of the stimulus period is in
that 48 hours.
You know, so all the good data kind of shows that we probably do have a 48 hour stimulus period
irrespective of kind of what will be doing.
And I think it's probably shorter than that.
So again, they start looking for reasons to kind of justify why a kind of lower frequency can work.
It's a really, really strange place to be because they're literally pushing water uphill.
Because everything we've got, whether it's like pre steroid era bodybuilding data, whether it's
Physiology analysis, whether it's long term trials that haven't been kind of tortured by statistical
analysis to make them show something that they don't show all the data kind of points in the same
direction, which is that three times is going to be better than two times.
And then clearly it just becomes an emotional kind of thing for people that like, Oh no, no, we want
to train 2 * a week or we want to train with different exercises multiple times per week instead of
the same exercise multiple times per week.
It doesn't really matter.
I mean it's all just kind of, we want to program in this way.
Therefore, we're going to make up reasons and, you know, kind of impart those opinions to our
followers without noticing and, and, and argue against what is clearly probably most logical, but
you know.
Yeah, I think your point before about obviously most people find themselves in this middle ground
where they kind of loosely want to understand stuff, but they kind of just want to be told how to
understand as opposed to seeking to really understand.
Yeah.
I think it would be valuable for people to identify if that is in fact where you're you're.
Well, if you're listing top pocket, then you are in that zone.
I mean, basically unless, unless you are in an, unless you're actively educating yourself.
So, you know, unless you are working through the FAQ, unless you are part of the certification
project, you know, unless you've done the mentorship or unless you are, you know, kind of going
through very carefully and reading the infographics and FAQ articles that I send that every week.
Unless you're doing those things, which, yeah, sure, a proportion of our our readership are
educating themselves actively.
Sure, cool, Great.
But I think most people are treating this as infotainment and they're not structuring their
education.
And that is going to put you firmly in the middle ground where you're basically just having your
information, your opinions are going to be kind of implanted in your brain by by your kind of, and
what you see is all there is algorithm that just kind of looks at whatever image you've got in front
of you and goes, that's truth.
Or you instinctively go, that's true.
And therefore you now absorb and modify your existing opinions or you look at it and go, that's not
truth.
And you kind of discard it and push yourself further away from that.
And that's all that's happening.
And there's no process of education going on at all.
There's no cognitive education is cognitive, right?
So if you are educating yourself, then you're thinking about how things work and you're trying to
move concepts your head and you're trying to connect that with an understanding of where that data
has come from.
Now, in a perfect world, you would actually read the entire paper, but most of the time that is
going to take you an extremely long period of time to get to where you need to be.
And so you're going to have to rely on a secondary source of interpretation of that in order to
understand.
So you need to know where the data has come from, what type of data it is and what you feel, you
know, kind of is important about that.
And that's that's doable without kind of reading every single paper word for word.
But you're going to have to have a structured guidance through that, which is what the FAQ does,
what the certification does, what the mentorship program has done.
You know, those are designed to get you to move concepts around in your head and understand them.
You don't have to read every single paper in detail.
That's education, that's cognitive, that's work.
You know, whereas emotionally, if you're, if you're interacting with stuff emotionally, which is
what human beings instinctively want to do, then you on the social media, basically what you're
doing constantly is just judging whether or not you feel that something is true or not based on how
it feels and your interpretation of the person that is giving the information.
And whether you feel the trust, whether or not, and your brain is basically just going, is that
truth or is it not?
And then if it's truth, then you take a little bit of the extra information that's provided and you
add it on to your existing model and you get like another two years down the line and you're
basically your model of how the strength training process works is now a conglomeration of different
emotional inputs from a different fitness influencers who you've trusted.
And it means nothing.
It's absolute garbage.
It is absolute garbage, you know, because all it is, is just a kind of Frankenstein of opinions
glued together from different people who didn't really know what they were talking about in the
beginning and managed to catch you on the right day in the right mood.
And it modified your opinion in a particular direction and connected with some other thing in your
head in the past and made you feel it was true.
And that's what most people are walking around with, a Frankenstein of opinions that they've
observed, absorbed from other people.
And then like Venice.
Is a floating city.
It's this whole infrastructure that's not really built on much of A foundation.
I find that comparison a little bit offensive, given that's probably my favorite city in the world.
But yeah, I mean, it's a Frankenstein, isn't it?
It's it's a Frankenstein's monster of opinions that have been.
And that's what most people are walking around with.
They're walking around with a Frankenstein's monster in their head of opinions that they've absorbed
over, you know, years of watching social media and having, depending on, you know, what you have for
breakfast in the morning or, you know, what mood you're in and whether the fitness influencer
catches you on the right day with the right idea.
And you just kind of then modify your beliefs slightly and it morphs into something slightly
different.
And that's, that's the, that's the middle of the bell curve.
That's what most people are walking around with.
And that's, and that's why when people ask me to take them seriously that I don't because it's not a
cognitive process.
So they've come to their current viewpoint.
Yeah, when I do consults around like training with people, often I'll try to gauge how much someone
seems to know about the topic.
And sometimes people will, you know, they'll consult with me and they may be coaches themselves or
they, you know, have a high interest in this and they've absorbed a lot of information.
And often they're doing what I would class the kind of fairly ludicrous things in the gym.
And I know that that's going to be very difficult sort of conversation for me to try to win them
over to, you know, my sort of way of thinking and, and how my, you know, I guess our model works.
And sometimes I get people who have no idea and they're like, Yep, you know, I've, I've never been
in the gym or I've just picked up a magazine and I've been following that.
And I get, I just have a sigh of relief.
I'm like, this is great because I can just explain to you the basics of what you need to understand.
And you've got no emotional attachment to, you know, I can tell you that actually this plan you've
been doing where you're doing 10 sets once a week per muscle.
I can just in one minute explain to you how that stimulus period is over very quickly and each
additional sets giving you about half as much stimulus as I set before.
And we may as well just do one or two sets every two or three days.
And that's going to be better than what you're doing.
And they're like, oh, that's interesting.
Oh, I get it now.
And it's it's so much easier with that emotional attachment.
It is absolutely.
It's the the Frankenstein's monster is the problem.
You know, it's a barbell situation.
Absolutely. 11 under the spectrum.
Somebody just wants a routine.
You can just go Yep, silver era routine bang done well.
I want to highlight that that's such a good point because if you are listening to this in the
middle, maybe maybe you should actually allow yourself to drift over to that side of the spectrum
where like, OK, sure, consume this information if you want, but maybe you don't.
Don't go do something more productive when you're like, seriously, you know, go and go and take up
a, you know, a more wholesome, you know, productive activity.
Seriously, get get off social media.
Go and do something, you know, kind of wholesome and and life affirming instead of this horrible
monstrosity that exists that just sucks the life out of people, you know, honestly, Yeah.
I mean, sure, if you want to join me at the opposite end of the barbell, then cool, you know?
But that's a cognitive place, not an emotional place.
Yeah, yeah.
So otherwise, you know, that's, hey, you know, we start our podcast with usually silver hero plans.
There's plenty of fun to say you can take next week half as many listeners.
Thanks for your advice.
Just telling everyone to turn off and stop listening to us.
That's how you meant to do it.
Yeah, it's just genuinely just who I am.
I just tell people how I see it.
But yeah, it's definitely a very big problem for the middle of the bell curve, which is that most of
the people that you will interact with in that zone are just, I've just got Frankenstein's monsters
in their heads of opinions that they're absorbed over multiple years that they don't really know how
they got there, you know?
I mean, yeah, it's.
And as you say, it's very difficult to reason somebody out of an opinion that they weren't reasoned
into, that they were emotionally LED into.
And that's, that's what you will see online.
As soon as someone gets triggered and starts getting emotional, then you know, it's because they
never required the opinion that they're defending cognitively.
Because if if you argue with me about something, then I'll say, well, This is why I think that.
And this is where I got the idea from and the concepts from.
And these are all the kind of, you can just trace it back through these these areas and you show me
that I made a mistake in any of those areas, then I'll modify my position that I've ended up at.
But you try and do that with anybody else or most other people and they will be like, oh, well, I
just thought that.
I know you just thought that you actually didn't think that you felt that that's different.
But anyway.
So the sort of bottom line here is care less.
Don't bother educating yourself unless you're going to be.
In a yeah, OK, unless, unless you want to do it properly, then what?
The infotainment.
Infotainment is probably the worst.
What's the right word?
Neologism.
I don't know, the invention of a new word.
There's there's definitely a a word that that describes that anyway.
Basically, it's probably one of the worst are words ever really to be coined because there isn't
actually any such thing.
You know, if you're if you're actually educating yourself, then it is is going to not going to have
an A heavy emotional content because as soon as there's an emotional content, then you're being
persuaded.
And if you're being persuaded, then you're not being educated really.
You know, I mean, the number of times people have said to me, oh, if you just made your work more
accessible, if you just made your work, you know, kind of more click baity.
If you just made it, you'd be, you'd be so influential and like, yeah, but then I wouldn't be
educating.
Anymore, if he just made it more emotional, then a lot of people have an emotional statement to it.
That's what they're saying to you.
Exactly.
And I'm like, yeah, but that's the point, isn't it?
If you've got, if you've got, then it's not.
You haven't educated.
Let me just emphasize that one more time.
If I persuade you that something is true by appealing to your emotions and making you feel good,
while I, you know, impart some information and giving you a reason to jump up and down about that
thing and to criticize other things in contrast to it, then I'm not educating you.
I'm brainwashing you into a way of our cult almost of believing a certain set of things.
If I set out a journey of educational content for you to work your way through, which is largely
neutral in emotional kind of context, then I'm educating you.
And you're like, yeah, but that's boring.
Yeah, I know.
But.
But what you're looking for is excitement of emotion.
But the minute I put that excitement of emotion in there, then I'm not educating you anymore.
Yeah.
I'm not manipulating you.
So.
So ultimately you've got to decide what you want for yourself.
Do you want, do you want to feel good now or do you want to actually know what's going on?
And I think that unless there's something very abnormal about you, like there is about me, then
you're always going to pick wanting to feel better right now and enjoy yourself rather than being
obsessive about figuring out what's going on.
You know, my brain just has an obsession with trying to understand what's going on.
That's just the way it's constructed.
So I'm always going to go down that route, however painful it is.
But not many people are going to do that because it's just not human.
You know, I think it actually is an interesting point, even for content creators, for coaches.
Like, I think we've moved into a space now over the last maybe five years or so where coaches feel
like they need to be educators and that from my experience, that didn't seem to be the case.
In the past, coaches were happy to be coaches and coaches would would potentially give out tips on
how to make the experience easier for the client or how to, you know, optimize your results,
whatever.
But they weren't trying to educate on underlying science and Physiology.
And now I think coaches feel like they need to be educators, but they're not actually like they're,
they're first and foremost coaches.
You know, they're, they're not doing what you're doing.
They're not spending.
I mean, God, I was a coach for freaking years before and like, I was an recessive coach where in my
spare time, this is the kind of stuff I'm doing.
Like I'm reading every book I can find.
I'm talking to people like you.
And it was years before I put out any public content on anything to do with training because I
didn't feel equipped or qualified to do that.
And now coaches who have been coaches for six months now, I feel like they need to be putting out
education.
So it's a really messy landscape, I think, even for content creators and for coaches to navigate.
Yeah, absolutely.
And of course, the algorithms reward information.
Oh, sorry, content, not information reward content, reward content that spikes emotions.
And so the algorithms themselves are pulling you further and further away from the possibility of
educating yourself.
I mean, ultimately this is, you know, this is a really, really interesting dynamic because what what
social media is going to do is it's going to prioritize manipulative emotional workers content and
de prioritize educational content.
And you know, I said it before, I say it again, if your emotions are being spiked during a, during
the consumption of some content that you are not being educated, it's not possible for you to be
educated in that scenario because you are not thinking, you are feeling.
And if you're feeling, then you're being imparted an emotion which is going to to then add on to
your Frankenstein's monster of opinions that you've got in your head, which represents what you
think is real.
And it's not.
So yeah, I think, I think actually it's inherently self-destructive.
Destructive is the wrong word.
It's inherently harmful if you like, for the seeking of the right answers or the truth of actually
what's going on, because the the great rewards are sent to the worst kind of type.
The least truly educated content.
Yeah, the least educated, educated content.
So it is, it is sort of self defeating in that sense, yeah.
It makes me think, you know, maybe as content creators, like maybe I should be putting out more
content around just helpful tips instead of trying to educate people.
I, I, I think, yeah, I mean, I think that that barbell idea is the place to start.
It's that, you know, ultimately, you know, how can we, how can we make, how can we make something
that is useful as possible?
Start, start there.
So we want to make something as as useful as possible.
Then my mission is to try and get physiological concepts into a model format which people can
literally pick up and implement.
If they are capable of understanding the model and applying it to strength training, then they'll be
able to write really great strength training programs.
Fantastic.
OK, so I'm serving a group of people who are very small in number.
They are willing to do some work to understand concepts.
I'm not saying that these people are going to be wading through individual papers.
They're not.
They're going to be looking at what I'm describing in the FAQ as a concept and saying, look, these
studies show this concept is in place, like these studies show that calcium amylate D does these
things.
And therefore we need to be aware that there will be these problems in this context and intra
workout and these problems in the post workout period.
And it can accumulate.
And when you start to understand that concept and nobody's had to read a paper to get this far, I
can literally just do that based on what I just said.
You can then start to change the way you program and think about stretch position exercises
differently, think about high repetitions differently, think about ecentric training differently,
think about volume dose responses differently.
And you start to incorporate that concept into your kind of way of strength training.
I mean, it's, it's like that is education.
Equally, you could take the opposite end of the barbell, you know, kind of where, where you're where
you are and you could go, hey, look, here's some inspiration from, you know, this silver era lifter.
This is the exact program that he did.
You know, here is how you could do that in a modern gym with these equipment choices.
Here's how you could do that in a in a garage gym setting with these equipment choices.
Here are some modifications and you could literally do like a couple of slides together showing that
here are your options if you want to do an inspired workout by, you know, I don't know, Steve Reeves
or whoever else.
Like we could literally just and you could even do a table week, but like, you know, here's exactly
the number of sets, reps and whatever.
And you could literally speak people that and I think it'd be really cool to go down that brew of
kind of so, so I think that's, you know, kind of there are directions that we can go in that would
be more useful.
Yeah, I just think social media maybe is not the place for education as as we've come to you
throughout this conversation and.
Well, you know, I think it's an anti educative tool.
Really.
Yeah, in the in the format that we experience, it's an anti educative tool.
I mean, you can argue that maybe it's different in other parts of the world, but yeah, certainly
where we are.
And you know, that's why obviously we've got the certification, you know, that exists as an
educational tool.
And I suppose social media just can't facilitate that.
Well, this isn't where I anticipated us ending up, but Philly people have founded a helpful.
Conversation.
Strange mood when I'm travelling, so that's the issue.
And yeah, I mean, it's my weekend, I think Sunday, yeah.
And I've spent all day reading philosophy, so that's probably put me in a particular mindset as
well.
So if you stuck with us this far through our rabbit roaring of topics that we've covered, thank you.
Do you want to give any summary to try to tie it all together or should we just leave people with
these desperate thoughts to do with it as.
I don't think they're that disparate.
I think basically it's, it's, it's, it's a, it was a series of observations on a recent debate
regarding training frequency and, and, and training volume.
That was the kind of the underlying thing, but the context of that was that the original
perpetrators of that conflict to that discussion online were people who were essentially falling
into the trap of infotainment.
You know, they were referencing a couple of comments around data and comments around, you know, long
term training studies and not actually providing any kind of full context or model or anything like
that.
So there's no education.
It was just like, believe me because I'm jacked, and believe me because I've got loads of people in
my group.
So believe me because I've got, you know, all these followers or believe me because I say I've read
this and who knows whether they've read it or whether they've just pulled it off.
AII mean, you know, ultimately it was a conversation about a specific question, but then it was a
conversation about the context of that question as well.
And it just happened to leaders in the direction of realizing that.
But actually, you know, generally speaking, social media is probably quite a negative thing.
And interestingly, actually, you know, some other prominent people in the space have made the same
observation but from a different angle.
I mean, literally the other day you were saying that you'd, some of the creators that you keep an
eye on because of their influence, they've been saying negative things about social media as well
for different reasons.
You know, they're experiencing other negative, which I'm not even going to try and speculate on
because I tried to stay away from social media as much as possible.
But ultimately I think it is interesting just to kind of think about the very, very negative effects
that it can have.
And, you know, I think being kind of terminally online isn't necessarily a good thing for a number
of reasons.
But the purpose of what I've been talking about today in that context is not to talk about those
harmful effects.
It's just to emphasize that what people think they are doing.
When they are scrolling through social media, looking at content creators in this space is not
actually what is happening.
They're not actually educating themselves.
They are absorbing opinions based on limited information provision.
The because of the spike in emotions that's coming alongside those is being incorporated into their
belief structure inadvertently with that is like a virus that's being executed inside your brain.
Really it's like a mind virus that's kind of your your absorbing by by allowing that content in in
that emotional state.
And that's ultimately why a lot to self help actually uses emotional kind of framing for many of the
interventions that they they kind of recommend.
It's because it actually does change people.
So by going online and exposing yourself to that emotionally kind of sort of framed content, you're
allowing someone to change your opinion without you actually having full control over that process.
And that's why I think the educational model that I'm doing is obviously a lot less successful in
financial terms, but actually is actually is capable of delivering what people say they want rather
than what they actually seem to kind of respond to.
But they.
A few weeks ago I put out a post and I said that if you are looking at content and that content is
making you feel anger or it's making you feel guilt or or embarrassment or shame, then ultimately
that content is not there to educate you.
It's there to influence you or manipulate you.
Totally, totally.
I think at the very least, if people understand that if you're watching something because the amount
of arguments I see online, but it's like how embarrassing that people think three times a week is
better than is.
OK, you've just made it really clear for everyone what you're doing right now.
If you're using any of this shame based terminology, you have no intention of educating.
Or maybe you think you've got an intention of educating, but you're not.
And at least as viewers and audiences, we can at least start to identify when that's happening to
us.
OK, that's it for us today.
Thank you guys.
Thank you for joining us.
We will be back next week with more philosophical ponderings.