Episode: 038 Periodisation for hypertrophy is pointless (unless you do this)
URL: https://open.spotify.com/episode/6SESCnRxg1l0WIdfo8bOzL
Published: 2026-02-09
================================================================================

Welcome back.
Thank you for joining us for another episode.
I'm ready to go with my cup of coffee.
If you don't have your coffee, this is your permission to hit pause and go get a cup or honor the
culture of my Co host and get a cup of tea instead.
I've never actually asked you, Chris.
Are you a big tea drinker?
I am, yes, I am a big tea drinker.
There we go, there we go.
So coffee or tea, I love for coffee, but you can have your tea.
Today we are going to dive into periodization and what it means for hypertrophy and when you may
consider doing it or not doing it or why one would even think about it.
And we're going to look at all the different training variables that constitute periodization, how
they make sense in the context of hypertrophy.
So that is going to be a fun conversation.
I don't know exactly where it's going to go, but I'm sure it's going to be exciting.
So stay tuned for that.
But before we jump into that, I as always.
Once you introduce you all to a old school training plan, now we're going to jump back in time to
the Silver era.
We've covered a few golden era plans lately, but we're going a little bit further back to 1952.
So just a little reminder that obviously when you look at anabolics and bodybuilding, most of the
time we can assume that probably was until the late 50s that we saw the influence of anabolics and
bodybuilding.
Yes, there were some early experimentations happening in 1954 and 1955, but that probably wasn't
influencing hypertrophy plans at that point to any significant extent.
And it wasn't until the late 50s and then even sort of like 19, maybe 19591960 that we start seeing
a bit more of an impact.
So this plan from 1952, we can be fairly confident that this is AI guess you could say genuine pre
steroid era body building plan.
Now this is coming from Clancy Ross or Clarence Ross.
Now we have talked about Clancy a couple of times, I think maybe in two episodes, perhaps we have
covered a single set plan of his before I believe and possibly even looked at a pre competition plan
where he actually split up his training a little bit.
Now what we've got here, I, I really like this workout plan.
So this came for me a magazine where they look in 1952901952 magazine where they looked at a number
of competitive bodybuilders at that time, including people like Steve Freeze.
And we've covered the plan he wrote at that point.
And they asked him, what is your favorite bodybuilding plan?
And this is a plan that Clancy came up with.
So this is, as was common at that point, these plans were repeated.
OK, so this was an A, a a plan, full body A, a A and it started with squats.
Now for each exercise he completed, 2.
Sets and then he said after a bit of time on this plan, you can add a third set, so two to three
sets.
So we start with squats for about 10 repetitions.
And then he went to leg extensions.
Now remember, this is 1952, so there wasn't a lot of, you know, easily accessible gym equipment and
machines.
And so these leg extensions were done with iron boots.
So if you're not familiar with what that is, it's exactly what it sounds like, a heavy boot that
they would place on the foot, strap on the foot and they could do leg exercises exercises with them.
Usually they'll do like leg curls with them.
But he was performing leg extensions.
Now, he did do high repetitions.
He did sets of 20, but presumably there would be a limitation to how much load you can use with an
iron boot.
And then he went into seated calf phrases again for sets of 20.
And then a wide grip barbell bench for sets of 10A, barbell pullover for sets of 10.
Now you're going to be very happy to see this, Chris.
We've got a wide grip lat pull down for sets of 10 and then close grip barbell upright row for sets
of 10, a standing kettlebell latch raise for sets of 10, and then reverse crunches.
These are done for sets of 10 as well, so I assume they must have been weighted.
And then barbell curl for sets of 10A, flat barbell triceps extension for sets of 10 and then
concluding with a seated barbell wrist curl.
And this is done for sets of 20.
So 12 exercises in total.
And anyone listening along maybe notice it wasn't any hamstring exercises there.
But Chris, what do you make of that?
So obviously this is a great routine to talk about prior to discussing periodisation and
bodybuilding because it's totally unperiodised.
So we've got, and it's not only unperiodised, but it also has no variation with it in training week
either.
So it's about as far away from periodisation as it's possible to get.
It's completely unchanging.
You could argue, I suppose that you're adding an extra set after a kind of couple of weeks or or a
month or two of training is, is a periodisation factor.
But really it's just kind of getting used to the program.
So in terms of exercise selection, as you said, it's got some really cool stuff in there.
We've got our wide lat pull down in there, frontal plane that pull down, which is going to give, you
know, really cool stimulus.
That's different from what we get with many of the other pulling exercises that you tend to see in
these silver area programs.
And really it's, it's a good set of exercises to get very, very solid coverage across the whole
body.
In in terms of what I see missing, you've already identified that we're missing a hamstrings
exercise, or at least you know, any hamstrings exercise.
Yeah, any because normally we'd at least have like a a bent over rows, so there'd be some isometric
like almost hamstrings.
This this doesn't have nothing at.
All absolutely nothing.
So but you know, other than that it's, it's got pretty good coverage.
In terms of what's different from some of the other silver air routines that we've looked at,
Obviously the the knee extension is different.
The wrist kill doesn't always appear.
We don't always get a wrist kill.
So and then the upright row is I think a bit superfluous.
It's basically just covering the same ground as other exercises in the program, like the lateral
raise.
So I think if I were to modify it I would take the upright row out and for the era that he is
training in I would probably have a stiff legged deadlift as the hamstrings exercise.
The seated car phrase I'm not a fan of.
I would have a standing car phrase instead.
I think the seated car phrase is unlikely to get interesting results.
I think that the soleus is pretty well developed in most people, especially people who do strength
training exercises like squats because soleus is the only calf muscle that can really work in a
squat.
The gastroc's got a antagonistic inhibition effect, so, but other than that, it's a really, really
solid program.
So I like it a lot.
I think it's got a lot to mileage personally, and this is just speaking personally, three sets of
these exercises will be well off the top end of what I would do.
As I said to you before we jumped on the podcast today, I'd be just about able to manage this with
one set, so single sets.
But I think it would be a great program with single sets.
It's interesting because some of these muscles have two exercises.
You've got a squat and a leg extension.
You've got the wide grip bench and the barbell pull over.
And yet he's done the same amount of sets for each exercise.
So he hasn't actually equated per muscle volume.
Yeah, per exercise volume.
And I wonder if if you were to adjust the sets based on the muscle, so some of these muscles where
there's two exercises, maybe you just do one set of H, you do 2 sets for one of the exercises, one
set for the other.
Maybe it'd be a little bit more manageable for some people.
Yeah.
Anything that just reduced the volume a little bit I think would be a great idea.
I just feel that a lot of people getting to the end of that workout are not really going to be
putting any meaningful abductive work into the exercises.
I think you'd be pretty.
Pretty.
That said, if you imagine by the time you get to the end barbell curl, triceps extensions, risk
curl, I mean a lot of that stuff is pretty mindless.
It's not going to be that fatiguing.
You're not going to this, The action feedback is not that significant.
I don't imagine that's going to be taking a whole lot of effort, but he does some significant stuff
earlier on, don't you?
Yeah.
And I think that is one of the issues actually, that he's kind of going in hard with the squat at
the very beginning.
And then it's like, you know how unless he's doing the squat and then he's going to go and have a
juice and sit down and chill for, you know, 10 minutes.
OK, fine.
That's that's a separate question, isn't it?
I, I normally would program a squat towards the end of a workout.
And for me personally, I, I normally would do squats last if I'm doing squats.
And the reason for that is because it just ruins too many exercises afterwards.
But I've actually made the change this week just gone.
I've, I've gone to essentially full body AB instead of a, a, a now my AB almost looks like an A, a,
a.
All I've done is I've put hamstring work predominantly on one of those days and quad work
predominantly on the other one.
So it's, it's sort of AB for lower body, a, a, a for upper body.
And so I'm squatting only every second session.
And now that I'm scoring every second session, I thought, you know what?
I'm, I'm gonna put it at the start of my workout, put a little bit more into squatting.
And it's interesting the difference would make psychologically, having it at the start, at the end,
and I don't know which is better because at the end I know it's coming.
Whereas at the start it's like arcade's done.
But man, I'm I'm wiped out for the next couple of exercises.
So I still don't know which side are for.
And is it better at the start or the end?
I don't know.
I think there's pros and cons to both.
Yeah, yeah.
OK, anything else to highlight what I do like with this workout?
The sets of 10?
I find sets of 10 is really nice sort of sweet spot usually if you're using a lot of different
exercises because it requires generally very little warming up, especially if you're doing a full
body thing like this and you got a couple different exercises per muscle.
So I like that he's sort of gone, you know, that sort of moderate, potentially lower end of moderate
sort of repetitions there just in terms of making it a little bit more efficient by doing heaps of
warming up.
Apart from that, yeah, the exercise sequencing, like we said, it's sort of hitting it hard and then
getting a little bit easy as you go on.
Anything else you think is worth mentioning?
No, not really.
I think we've covered pretty.
I mean, it is to repeat what we've said in many previous episodes.
It is so much better than almost anything you're going to find online today that it's not funny, but
there are definitely ways to make it a little bit better.
As we've described, there's a few exercises that are kind of duplicating and there's a couple of
exercises that maybe not there, but you know, really just conceptually an incredibly solid approach
to strength training.
It just highlights how good you can or how good your programming can get if you don't have
anabolics.
Confusing, confusing thing.
And how simple a plan like this you can literally give to someone and say hey if you can only do
single sets, just do single sets.
If you feel like you can do 2 sets, do 2 you.
Could even do 2.
You could even do single sets twice a week.
I mean, you could, yeah.
Absolutely.
You could just take this one plan and modify the frequency and the volume based on the individual
perfect.
And then like you said, you just adjust a couple of those exercises done perfect.
So you, I mean, if you're talking to somebody who'd literally never done any strength training
before and there was kind of fairly kind of hesitant about getting into it, you could start them off
on single sets twice a week and then they, as they wanted to, they could move towards this as you
know, after two years or whatever.
I mean, it actually contains within itself the possibility to cover a huge range of different
appetites for training volume and frequency.
I mean, yes, really incredible compared with the absolute nonsense that you see online today, which
is what I'm going to be talking about very shortly.
Yeah, let's, let's do it.
Let's say way periodization for hypertrophy.
Where do we even begin?
So I would like to start by trying to present a very or as uncontroversial a definition of
periodization in this context as I can.
So by by doing that, paradoxically I'm going to upset everybody because I'm going to be kind of not
giving the full magnitude of the definition or the meaning to the people who have maybe read a lot
about periodisation.
And potentially, you know, maybe I'm not being precise enough for some people, but I'm just going to
come out and say that I think that periodisation in this context just means organising your training
into separate sections or blocks.
So the classic block periodization idea, you kind of do.
And, and really when I say blocks, I mean anything longer than a week.
So if you're changing your training from one week to the next or from one month to the next, then
that would be a periodization strategy.
If your training is altering within a training week, then that's a programming decision.
So essentially, if somebody said, and this is where it gets weird, This is why I'm going to upset
people because when people say that they're doing daily undulating periodization, that's not
periodization in the model that I'm now using, because periodization of a daily undulating variety
means changing things from one workout to the next within a week.
So you do something different on a Wednesday from on a Monday and that's a training split.
And I, I think that even though that is going to 'cause me conflict with the people who want to use
the words daily undulating periodization, it's a necessary conflict because we need to separate the
words programming and periodization off.
Otherwise this conversation just doesn't make any sense.
So, so that's kind of where I'm starting from.
I'm saying periodization is just when you alter your training from one week to the next in a planned
way, that's periodization.
When you alter your training within a week in a planned way, that's the training split.
That's the programming thing.
So we're going to talk today about altering training from one week to the next and having different
things going on in different weeks for planned reasons.
And I think that there's a whole load of kind of philosophical reasons and physiological reasons why
people are going to do that.
But when we were talking before the podcast, we actually identified that there's three common
training variables that people will periodize in a hypertrophy training program.
I'm not talking about athletic periodization here.
So if you're interested in athletic periodization, I recently talked about this with Rob Mouser in
my other podcast.
So that's a good place to go.
But this is about literally just hypertrophy.
And we identify these three training variables that people will periodize.
There's the training volume, there's the Rep range and there's the exercise selection.
Now, technically you can periodise anything.
So you could periodise Rep, sorry, rest periods between sets, you could periodise resistance
profiles.
I mean the, the list is endless.
But fundamentally what we're talking about today I think covers the majority of the situations in
which you're going to find a periodised programme fiber tree on the Internet.
Most people can be periodising either volume or Rep range or exercise selection.
I think historically probably most people varied Rep range.
Like last decade or so it's moved across to volume And then more recently people are trying to argue
that exercise selection can be periodised as well.
So it's kind of, I'd say there's the common type of variable that people are going to periodise has
changed over time just in terms of how popular it is to do that.
But fundamentally any of those three could be periodised in any training program.
And if you go and look at a random program on the Internet that's been written by somebody you know,
kind of high profile, chances are it will actually periodise all three of those things at the same
time.
Yeah, that's true.
Yeah.
And you've mentioned your working definition here.
Periodization is something that's occurring over like longer than a week, so week to week.
So obviously that duration can change as well.
Like it could be literally like one week, second week, third week, or it can be like month to month
or could even be longer than that potentially as well.
Totally.
And some common, I guess, models of periodization that people might see in the hypertrophy world,
the ones at least that I see would be undulating is a very common periodization model, linear
periodization.
And then you got like weekly undulating.
So it's happening across a smaller timeline like week to week as opposed to month to month or or
longer.
They tend to be the main hypertrophy periodization models I see.
Are there any more that come to the top of your head?
So I don't spend a lot of time analysing periodization models for reasons that will become clear as
we get into this discussion.
I just noticed that the more popular a influencer or personality tends to be, the more periodization
and the more periodized variables they tend to shoehorn into their programs.
So they tend to become more and more complicated and that gives the appearance of more value because
something that appears to be more complicated, people naturally assume that it has more kind of
thought gone into it, more kind of value provided.
And obviously what we're going to argue is that that's the opposite to being true.
So we've got these three training variables.
I think they provide a gateway for us to just talk about the issues that are going on in periodised
training programmes.
So let's start with volume.
So in the last kind of decade or so, maybe 15 years, there's been a surge of interest in periodising
volume in the context of a training period.
So what I mean by that is that there might be a starting point of a low or moderate volume in a
training period and then nothing else changes.
It's just that each exercise adds an extra one or two sets over the course of the following weeks.
And it might be done one set per week, it might be one set every other week.
It doesn't really matter.
The point is that it's increasing.
And there's even a term in the resistance training literature called progressive volume load that's
been coined to describe this particular way of training.
So essentially the number of sets increases over time.
And the rationale behind this was that volume was the overriding factor that would determine how
much muscle growth was being stimulated by a training program.
And ultimately what I think the problem with this approach is, is the fatigue that accumulates at
the same time and how that then starts to inhibit the growth that the programs are producing while
simultaneously not allowing the researchers to see that it's happening.
So let me just very quickly summarize something interesting about the literature that relates to
fatigue accumulation.
Essentially in the strength training literature, there's been two periods of time in which
researchers have looked at the accumulation of post workout fatigue.
There's the kind of maybe 1990s, maybe 2000s, and then there's the more recent in the last kind of
five or so years.
So you've got these two quite different periods of time in which research has been done on this
question.
If you go back to the earlier period when the research was done, like most fatigue research, they
always start by trying to create a big amount of fatigue when they do an experiment.
So they they use super maximal eccentric training, They're just trying to create a really big effect
so that they measure a meaningful effect.
There's no point in starting with normal strength training because you might miss something that was
clearly obvious, but in this particular case it actually created a problem.
So the study design of investigating fatigue accumulation is literally to do or to separate your
subjects to two groups to start with.
And in both groups you do an initial damaging super maximally centric workout and then you track the
recovery of that fatigue back to baseline over one or two weeks of recovery.
So you kind of just get that baseline effect.
And then in half your subjects in the experimental group, after two or three days post the original
workout, you give them a identical workout involving the same kind of super maximal eccentric
contractions.
And then you compare the recovery of that group who's done the additional workout with the recovery
of the baseline group who hasn't done that additional workout.
And so obviously, if fatigue is accumulating from these super maximal eccentric workouts, what we
should see is that the group, the experimental group that does 2 workouts should have a slower
recovery to baseline from the original time point of the first workout compared to your baseline
group.
Does that make sense?
And what happened in every single one of those studies is that that second eccentric workout two or
three days later had absolutely 0 impact on the recovery from the first workout.
And that created actually quite a big problem because on the one hand, you've got practitioners and
they obviously, you know, most of this was at the time in conversation with strength and listening
coaches working in sporting contexts and, you know, power lifters and what have you.
And they were saying, and the researchers were kind of looking at the data going, we don't think
post workout fatigue accumulates.
We think that if you do a workout in a muscle damaged state, it doesn't actually slow down your rate
of recovery from the previous workout.
So there's no fatigue accumulation and everybody else in the industry is looking at them going
really that's not what we're seeing.
So you've kind of got this dislocation between kind of what is obviously happening in practice
versus what was happening in the literature.
And they kind of just stopped looking at it after a while because they're either kind of, and I
don't know, I mean like just sick of getting the same answer and it not making any sense.
So that that literature body kind of sits on its own and it's really nice high quality studies.
It's just not really telling us what we were expecting to see anyway, in the last kind of five
years, we've had a totally different set of studies done in normal strength training.
So not supermaximally centering.
So we've got this new set of data now where basically we've got normal strength training programs
with insufficient recovery between workouts.
So there's a famous one where they did four sets of knee extensions with tender at maxes every day
for like a week and then track the recovery after that.
Now, if you started with your previous body of literature in super Maxima eccentrics and said we
think that that's going to basically be our baseline assumption, then you would say that doing, you
know, kind of a week's worth of knee extensions, 4 sets to 10 reps every day you get at the end of
the week.
You would find that if you finished on a Sunday, then you'd be recovered by Wednesday because
faucets and knee extensions is probably only going to take two or three days to recover from because
you haven't accumulated any fatigue.
So you shouldn't see any kind of post work gravity problem at all.
But that's not what happened.
You get like 11 or 12 days of recovery after that week of crazy training, which tells you that
fatigue is accumulating.
You're actually creating what I call a fatigue debt or a post workout fatigue debt.
And essentially the days of recovery that you haven't taken, you're now going to have to take.
And that's been kind of backed up with a number of other studies afterwards, the same concept, just
using normal strength training, insufficient recovery between workouts and you start to create this
fatigue debt.
You start to have to take those days of recovery at the end of the training block instead of in
between the workouts that you did before that.
Now mathematically, it actually works pretty well.
If you look at the number of days of recovery that you need to take, it pretty much adds up to the
number of days of recovery that you didn't take.
So let me give you a numerical example.
So let's say you're doing say 3 workouts a week and you're doing three sets.
It's in each workout, moderate loads and you're covering perfectly and you actually, you've got an
extra day of recovery on a if you work Monday, Wednesday, Friday, you've actually got a Sunday when
you actually don't need to take that day of recovery, but you get it anyway.
So you get an extra day.
If you then bump that up from three sets to five sets, so you're doing 5 sets three times a week,
moderate loads to failure.
Now you're creating an extra day of fatigue debt that you're not going to be covering on two of
those workouts per week because the one that you do on a Friday actually does recover by the Monday
because you've got Sunday.
So basically each day you do that program, it's for each, each week you do that program, you're
racking up two days of fatigue accumulation.
And that means that after say 3 weeks of doing that routine, you're going to have six days of
fatigue accumulation that you're going to need to take if you want to get rid of that.
So you're actually going to need to take a week of either nothing or minimal kind of training in
order to get back to and on fatigued state.
So the question is why do we have these totally different results in the two halves of the
literature?
Well, basically it's because if you look at the amount of post workout fatigue that is created in
those super maximally centric workouts.
So basically you have to put yourself in the mindset of the research who's trying to create a really
big effect so that they can measure it.
They go in and they kind of do really high volume of super maximally eccentric contractions and
something like the biceps brachy, which get absolutely clobbered by, you know, kind of any kind of
muscle damaging exercise because they're really high voluntary activation and really fast switch
fibre proportion.
And they do that in untrained subjects.
So you get this just monstrous effect, absolutely monstrous effect, which basically creates a huge
secondary muscle damage effect, which keeps fatigue really, really high, as in strength really,
really low.
And it drops below 50% of maximum strength of baseline.
And that's the key because if you look at most muscles kind of have this approximate distribution of
5050.
I mean, biceps is pretty well like 60-40, but you get really low.
I mean, in some cases people are getting down to 3040% of baseline strength, but it's at least 50%.
And that means that you basically you go into the second workout three days later.
Fatigue is actually probably higher now than it was a baseline and you've got no fast switch fibre
activation possible.
You're not getting either you're not getting any fibres activated because the inflammation from the
muscle damage creating superspinal fatigue is switching the motor units off, or you're getting
calcium I related to the muscular level which is just stopping the fibres activating internally even
if you do send them an activation signal.
So the fibres actually don't do anything.
You go to the second workout and it's like we just didn't do that.
Actually, it didn't happen in the way in the from a stimulus point of view, the actual workout
didn't happen.
Yeah, you went to the gym and you did all the kind of the work and actually nothing happened.
So in those studies, what was your recovery period?
How long did it take to fully recover?
Well, I think it varies, but it's over a week normally.
Over a week, because you would think then that that would correlate with how much we would
accumulate in terms of if you're doing multiple workouts have to back, would we see it as similarity
and fatigue accumulation?
The way I think, the easy way I think to look at it is to say these studies and similar studies of
really severe muscle damage give you a backstop time period that can't really be exceeded.
So yeah, I think basically it's like two to three weeks probably is probably a ballpark figure.
I'll dig some stuff out.
There are studies that go on a little bit longer than that.
But I think 2:00 to three weeks is probably about as much damage as most people can create in a
scenario where they're just throwing untrained people into a super maximally centric training
workout for a vulnerable muscle like the biceps bracket.
I think 2:00 to three weeks is probably back end.
So if you kind of would, if you kind of approach that and say, well, OK, so if I want to do some
training in that period, so if I actually want to do say single sets twice a week as my minimal kind
of dosage that's going to create hypertrophy, you're better than maintenance, then I would probably
say 4 weeks is probably a period of time that I would kind of latch on to.
So if somebody's kind of maybe, so maybe we're in a position where we're providing a training
program to somebody who's come from a previous influencer whose perspective on volume was
stratospheric and so they.
Just done a German volume training phase.
They've just arrived and they crawl in the door on their hands and knees and they go like, help me,
I need a program that actually does something useful rather than make me tired and miserable all the
time.
So we would probably say take a four week period to let them wash all of that out while still doing
some kind of bare, bare minimum work in the in that in that time.
So I think 4 weeks is probably a good starting point to take into account the fact that it's not,
you know, complete rest in that period.
So I think fatigue accumulation probably has a backstop of about four weeks from a hypertrophy point
of view.
I mean arguably you might be able to say this is the residual a bit longer for speed type stuff, but
that's a separate question.
So yeah, I think.
And in that situation, if if someone is trained twice a week, then single sets or whatever it might
be for that month, those single sets or that training they're doing, that's still adding some
accounts.
That's what I'm saying.
That's why I'm adding the extra week on top of what my original estimate of two to three weeks was.
I'm saying I think 4 weeks is probably the right number.
So yeah, if somebody's done something really silly for a couple of months and their fatigue
accumulation is absolutely as high as it can possibly be, they've maxed out their fatigue debt,
then, you know, you would say, OK, well, let's look at, you know, giving them four weeks to kind of
get through that and then we'll go back into a slightly more aggressive.
And so they're doing those two sessions a week.
Essentially you're kind of losing 2 days of recovery.
So now you're you're eating away at 5 days of recovery debt per week, give or take.
Yeah, basically we're, we're just trying to get rid of that as fast as we possibly can, but while
still not, you know, kind of losing all the adaptations that we've been creating.
So the important thing to recognise though, is that the fatigue that is present in those scenarios,
like I was just kind of alluding to, is comprised of reduced mechanical tension at the most fibre
level by stopping the fibres from actually contracting, even though receiving an electrical signal
or reducing the amount of force that it can produce because of the damage.
Or alternatively, the Super spinal fatigue is just switching the fibres off and stopping them from
actually working.
And what that means is you literally are going to the gym in those end weeks of a high volume
programme where the volumes are super, super high and the fatigue debt is high and nothing is
happening because there's actually no stimulus.
And ultimately there's actually a very cool study.
And I'm actually tempted to break one of my own rules and see if I can find the study title.
I don't have to do that.
Basically there was a maybe you can remember.
It's the one where they measured intracellular and extracellular water.
Can you remember?
The that wasn't the the way.
Yeah, it is.
It's the effects of graded way supplementation during extreme volume resistance training by Cody
Horn.
And so just a quick note on that study, if you, if you, if anybody's listening to this and they want
to look it up, just read through how they're measuring muscle swelling.
And what they do is they measure intracellular and extracellular water using I think it's
bioelectrical impedance.
Now the really cool thing about that is you get a inside intracellular means inside muscle fibers,
an extracellular means outside muscle fibers.
And they decided that edema from this volume program was only extracellular.
Well, actually that's not true.
Intracellular water is the primary component of edema.
It's actually the main thing that we see in post workout muscle swelling is an increase in the
swelling of individual muscle fibers.
So if you look at the post workout petite Physiology literature, you see a lot of studies showing
that it's the single fibre swelling that is the primary component, not the extracellular water
that's the primary component.
So we will talk about muscle swelling.
Post workout is actually intracellular, not extracellular.
So when I look at their study, I actually deduct from the muscle size measurements both
intracellular and extracellular water.
They only deducted extracellular, but I think it's appropriate to deduct both.
So if you do that, what you see is that the muscle growth, as in the whole muscle growth of size
over the course of that training program, which increased in volume over the period of time.
Was it 6 weeks?
I think I did have a paper up in front of me a moment ago.
Yeah, six weeks.
So the first week basically the whole muscle size increases even kind of after deducting extra
water.
And then in the second three weeks it actually goes down if you deduct both extra.
So what I was showing you literally is exactly what I'm saying.
So if you deduct all the swelling in a progressive volume low program like that, you actually end up
with lower muscle size at the end of the program.
Then you did it halfway through when kind of doing a program that was low void.
So it's literally showing you exactly what I'm explaining here, which is that if you train with
super high volumes, you'll actually shrink in terms of real muscle size, not.
Because you're not accessing those muscle fibers anymore.
Because you're literally not having those muscle fibers anymore.
Yeah, so I'm just looking at the graph now that I've done to deduct both extracellular and
intracellular.
So if you deduct only extracellular, you you grow apparently up to the three-week point and then you
plateau more or less for the for the second-half.
If you deduct both intracellular and extracellular, you actually shrink in the second three weeks
and you start heading back towards baseline, which is.
In that study just people may not be aware they were adding.
Was it 2 sets per week they were adding?
So they are starting with 10 sets per week is my note here.
And they ended up on 32 sets per week in the last week, so.
I think it didn't add in a linear way.
I think they added maybe more in the last few weeks or something.
So, yeah, I mean, it's that's kind of I think the paper is Open Access.
So I think people can probably.
But yeah, basically it's adding a, it's creating a lot of problems for researchers because they're
not deducting the muscle size measurements, sorry, the swelling from their muscle size measurements
when they're doing those calculations.
So I think that then confuses people into thinking that the muscle sizes increased to a greater
extent than it actually has.
So they do these high volume training programs, they're like, oh wow, you know, you've experienced
this when you've had clients come to you and you've put them onto a lower volume programme.
Rob's told me the same thing, that people complain.
They instantly start losing size when they go from the high volume to the low volume.
You've got to kind of break it to them that that size wasn't real.
Well, you know what they normally say?
They say that when they first start.
I'm.
Getting stronger but I'm getting smaller.
How?
That is exactly what they say exactly.
Within a week or two I got smaller, but I'm getting stronger aviation.
What's happening?
Yeah, like, well, I'm sorry to break it to you, but you basically got fooled.
Your previous program was just making you swollen, not swollen, but actually swollen.
So, yeah, it's, but that's kind of, you know, And then of course, we've now got a load of people
running around screaming that edema doesn't happen.
I'm like do the intracellular extracellular measurement and you'll find that is happening.
So this study I think is a good example of this, this idea of periodizing volume and increasing
volume over time.
And obviously the question then would be, well, there's a limitation I guess to recoverable volumes,
right?
So if someone had started like the program we started with today, so it started with two sets and
added one or two sets, it's talking to the same effect.
Yeah.
So essentially there is a very tiny window that we can operate in.
And if you're doing workouts 3 * a week for a muscle, which you know, kind of frequency analysis
suggests we probably should be doing, then ultimately you've kind of got the ability to move between
one and three sets.
That's your window per workout.
So 3 to 9 sets per week or one to three is kind of your top end.
So that's.
A lot of a lot of Grinch Park stuff did periodize in this way.
He would start with one set.
The courses he wrote, he'd say start with one set, go up to add a set each.
I think it was each week he suggested it and he would normally go to five sets.
Now, obviously a lot of his work is doing sets of five repetitions.
So we've talked in the past and obviously there's a difference between doing a sub six repetitions
and, and sort of above that.
But you know, obviously there's a a ceiling there.
He's not saying, hey, add a set every week until you get to 12 sets per muscle or per exercise.
You know, these guys who did do this kind of thing, the silver area knew, hey, there's a very clear
ceiling.
And sometimes they would even say, look, if you can only go to four sets and then you feel like
you're not recovering, you stay four sets.
You know, they, they knew that there was clearly a limitation there.
Yeah.
And absolutely.
I think, but the the lesson or the kind of overall point here that we're trying to communicate is
that the rationale behind periodization of volume is the idea that we want to get into zones where
volume is really, really high because that somehow has a greater stimulating effect on muscle
growth.
And the point I'm making here is that that assumption assumption is fundamentally exactly wrong, is
the opposite to what's happening.
We're actually clearly seeing both a mechanistic rationale for higher volumes at the end of training
programs being less effective and actually allowing attribute to happen.
And we've literally got a study showing that that does happen in an outcome point of view.
So, you know, I think it's fairly clear that the rationale behind volume periodization is wrong.
There's a possibility to periodize volume to a little extent.
I would just describe between one and three sets per workout, but that's it.
Outside of that, and that's really just a customization issue.
Yeah, essentially.
Yeah, it's funny what your personal.
Yeah.
Recoverable volume is, yeah.
I think what you can deduce here is if someone is periodizing, escalating volume and at the end of
it they say you at the end of this phase you need to take a period of, you know, a week or two weeks
then the previous.
Weeks were not very effective, Yeah.
Yeah, then you know that that obviously that phase didn't work.
So I think kind of where that leaves us is that volume periodisation is of extremely limited value,
of extremely limited interest for most people.
Most of the time.
There's literally just a kind of finding your own sweet spot within that one to three sets per
workout in the in the kind of the standard strength training paradigms that we're using, OK.
Cool.
So so periodising volume basically no need to do it.
You find what volume works for you and you stick with that.
That's that's sort of the bottom line there.
Exactly, exactly.
Yeah.
So the second one is then and going back in time I guess is the Rep range periodisation.
So this kind of, I guess had a lot of interest in the scientific literature, I guess maybe a similar
amount or slightly less interest in the bodybuilding community.
But it now pops up in training split context to where people are doing different Rep ranges and
different days of the week in a daily undulating periodization model.
But what I want to talk about is in the context of a periodization routine.
So this is where people are doing a block of heavier loads or a block of lighter loads.
You know, not just, you know, different loads within a training week, which is a totally separate
issue.
So why is it a totally separate issue?
Well, it's a totally separate issue because if you do blocks of training, then you get a potential
for adaptations to happen and then adaptions to get lost.
So that's not going to happen if you're training everything within a single week because you've got
the overlap that you need between workouts to keep the adaption that you are creating.
So essentially one end of the spectrum.
With heavier load training, you're going to get greater increases in MOTU recruitment as your
primary adaption and you're going to suffer a little bit less post work appetite.
If you're training with lighter loads, you're going to get some muscular endurance related
adaptations like buffering capacity.
You might get a little bit more of an increase in compilerization.
I don't think that difference between loads is as big as most people think it is regarding
capillarization.
It is big regarding buffering capacity, but I don't think it's quite big regarding capillarization.
The primary driver of how many capillaries there are around the Moss fiber is how big it is, not how
or what what fiber type it is or what oxidator capacity it has.
That does make a difference and it does.
It does influence it, but it's not the primary driver.
The primary driver is the fiber size.
So if you increase the Moss fiber size, the polarization will follow it.
And that's really important point actually, because some people think, and that's intrinsic to this,
this kind of rationale, they think they can drive the compolarisation first and then the hypertrol
will follow.
And that's not going to happen.
It's the other way around.
The hypertrophy demands more compolarisation in order to supply the necessary kind of oxygen the
fibre needs.
So ultimately when people say Oh well, I'm going to do high reps training for a block because that
then gives me adaptations that support future hypertrophy.
No it doesn't.
The causality is the opposite way around.
You create the increase in fiber size and that pulls the fiber to start increasing compilerization.
So and in terms of things like buffering capacity, you're just delaying metabolite related fatigue
to later in the set.
It's not really doing anything for my SO people go Oh well if I do light load training I can
increase the number of reps I can do with a given load that gives me a bigger hypertrophy stimulus.
No it doesn't.
All it does is give you the ability to delay light, have light related fatigue, and push your
stimulating reps an extra one or two further into for the set that you're doing.
So instead of doing a 10 Rep Max and getting 5 stimulating reps, you're now doing a 12 Rep Max and
getting 5 stimulating reps.
So nothing has changed really.
So I think there's this idea that people can use light loads to create create a growth in subsequent
heavy load or moderate load blocks.
That's not true.
All that's going to happen is you're going to get more damage from the light loads post training.
So you're going to have to do fewer sets if you want to avoid fatigue accumulation because light to
load is going to cause more damage than heavier loads.
The opposite isn't really the case.
If you do heavier load training blocks, you're going to get a motine recruitment increase that's
bigger than you would get with other loads.
And you're going to now have this interesting what we call a phase potentiation effect, where you
now have higher recruitment in your subsequent training blocks.
That's going to give you more hypertrophy.
So there is a kind of value to having occasional blocks and heavier load training.
We were actually just talking about this before the podcast 'cause we were chatting about how most
of the time in a full body AAA routine, we tend to drift towards programming slightly higher Rep
ranges, like sort of the top end of what I would be comfortable with, just like the moderately heavy
load.
So 8 to 10.
And that can be really cool because you can just jump from exercise to exercise and bash through a
whole load of exercises in one session, which you want to do if you're doing, you know, a, a, a.
But if you're doing AB, then you now have the ability to back off a little bit on the total number
of exercises per workout.
And you can kind of mix and match a bit and you can go towards heavy loads and you can now go, OK,
well, I'm going to, you know, push things.
So there's a really nice kind of people want to periodization routine that involves ranges.
It's a really nice one where you can kind of do full body AB for a while with heavier loading and
taking an extra warm up set and getting happy with each exercise that you're doing.
And you're doing fewer exercises per session.
And then subsequently go on to a full body A, a, A and sort of remember, range goes a bit higher.
You don't get the same benefits in recruitment, but you've already had them from the previous
training box.
So that that phase potentiation concept does in fact exist.
But there's nothing stopping somebody just doing full body AB forever, nothing stopping them doing
that at all.
So they could literally just train with everyone all the time if that's what they want us to do.
So it's not necessary.
It's just a a way of allowing us to do for body A, a A and still get benefits from recruitment from
time time by dropping back into full body AP.
Yeah.
And that's that's how I program with my groups as well.
If people are doing, or if I'm doing a group that's a a a, it's very hard to do some of the low Rep
work, multi set work and I tend not to do it.
Or I might do it for one exercise at the start of each work out and then we might alternate the
exercise we do it for.
But if you're doing AB, you just have so much more time.
Obviously even that workout where you can actually afford to do some of that multi set, lower
repetitions, unilateral work, isometric or any of that stuff, that's Modi.
And if you keep in focus, that's just a little bit more time consuming.
Totally.
So ultimately I think again in the same way that I said with periodization of volume, there's a tiny
little kind of application there buried under all the rubbish, here again we've got a tiny little
application of Rep range periodisation, again buried under all the rubbish that people talk about.
Is possible to get a benefit from, you know, achieving higher levels of recruitment for subsequent
training blocks by using heavier loads basically, but the reverse doesn't really apply.
And the interesting thing there is that motor recruitment gains achieved from using heavy loads
don't go away.
So you get a kind of really persistent effect of achieving that gain in recruitment the last six
months to a year.
So you're not going to be saying, Oh well, if I do a lot of, you know, the moderate load, do I keep
the recruitment gains?
Yes, you do.
The opposite probably isn't true about anything you achieve from light to load training.
Any buffering capacity improvements and computerization or anything like that is probably going to
go away pretty quickly.
It's a peripheral adaption, the body isn't going to keep it if it doesn't need it.
So even if it were to be helpful, which isn't, then it would go away quickly anyway, so you would
benefit from it.
So one of the popular periodization models for hypertrophy training is undulating, which consists of
doing an intensification phase and then an accumulation phase.
Intensification be higher loads and the accumulation is going to be higher volumes.
Now, while there's inherent issues in that and we've sort of talked about some of those, one could
approach that with this kind of structure of what you just outlined there with the intensification
phase could be multi sets, lower repetitions, Modi and I would.
Actually use multi sets.
I would, I would, I would.
I would go with the full body AB and I would actually keep my volume as low as possible because
increasing recruitment is much more sensitive to the presence of post workout teeth than hypertrophy
is.
So if I actually want to create a motor unit equipment stimulus, I actually want to go into the gym
wanting to tear the bar off the floor because I've got no post workout teeth at all.
I'm raring to go.
I don't really want to be pulling.
How low would you be going into repetitions though?
Because in my head I'm thinking, you know, doing double S in.
Terms of sets, I would probably be keeping it at single sets and I'd probably be going for the kind
of five Rep Max territory.
Yeah.
OK.
So you could, yeah.
So you could do, but obviously in that case you'll be doing multiple warm up sets to get to that
five Rep.
Max Exactly, exactly, exactly.
Yeah.
And you could use those warm up sets again to have a go at the MOTI and equipment adaption because
you go pretty kind of hard after your warm upsets if you wanted to.
So the point is, I it's just that the adoption stimulus is slightly different from what we get with
hypertrophy.
So I just want to pay attention to that.
Yeah, yeah.
And then in the accumulation phases you could be doing single set higher like moderate repetitions
that allows you to have perhaps more excise variation in in that phase.
Totally you could.
Because you've got more time up your sleeve.
You, you could, but I would be wary of then where you were going with that because this brings us
actually to the third of our training variables, which is periodization of exercise selection.
And this is actually really controversial at the moment because you've got, and it kind of moves
into training split issues, but the problem is still the same.
So I've mentioned this on the other podcasts that I did with Rob recently when we talked about
periodisation in an athletic context.
And I said technically if you're doing 3 different exercises for a muscle group across a training
week, then you're actually doing a periodis periodisation routine, not a training split routine.
Because you go off the end of what is kind of possible to, you know, keep you growing those relative
muscle fibres each week.
You actually have an atrophy issue that pushes you beyond the training week kind of cycle.
But essentially if people are periodising, let's just stick with periodisation for the time being if
you are periodising exercises.
So like you do 4 weeks of 1 biceps exercise for a muscle group and then the next 4 weeks you switch
to doing another exercise for the same that kind of muscle.
And this is really important that a lot of the training programs and training groups that are being
provided online in the last kind of couple of years change exercises.
They go, oh, we did this exercise last month, so we're going to do this exercise this because
reasons.
And I'm like, none of those reasons make any sense because literally if you're using a different
exercise, unless it just looks different, but it's biomechanically the same.
So I made this point before that you can, yeah, sure, you can get people to do barbell biceps curls
in a standing position or dumbbell biceps curls in a standing position.
And it's basically the same thing biomechanically.
It's just going to look different.
And so the person who's buying the program thinks, oh, wow, no, I'm doing a different exercise.
It must be, you know, surprising the muscle in some kind of crazy way.
It's just the same exercise bio mechanically.
So, but if we're actually changing it, so if we could switch between preacher curls and you know,
kind of standing barbell curls or, you know, reverse cap easy bar curls and we're changing the
exercise and there's a lot of nonsense being talked to.
The moment where people are going, Oh well, we're going to have our cake and eat it.
We're going to say that these exercises target or emphasize and they kind of start making like
different phrases up to try and get around the problem, which is that fundamentally if you use a
different X size, then you've got a different number of fibers being excluded at the top end of the
voluntary activation deficit.
Voluntary activation deficits are the reason why different X sizes will target different parts of a
muscle and actually leave some fibers, different fibers untrained.
Because as you progress up through Hanemann size principle in the various areas of the muscle, the
brain is going to preference those areas that have better leverage and exclude those areas that have
worse leverage.
And that's going to differ depending on the exercise you're doing.
So you're going to end up excluding different regions and the highest mode units of the region that
you are finding least effective for the exercise, it's going to be most fibers, they get excluded
from the exercise that you're doing.
And so literally as you do one exercise for one month, you're going to be hitting the fibers of
those regions that are relevant.
And then you change that exercise and you do a different exercise and now you're going to get
atrophy in the top end of the fibers that are not being used or top end of the motions, sorry, that
are not being used.
And essentially what that means is that you're not really benefiting from the exercise variety that
you're using.
So there's no planet on which excise selection needs to be periodised.
And it actually then collides with the issue of full body AB versus full body A, A, A in terms of
exercise selection, because what we don't want to do is have a block of training.
Let's say, let's say somebody's been doing full body A, a, A for six months and they're happy with
it, but they feel like they really need an increase in recruitment before they can move forwards.
They might say, OK, I'm going to drop down to full body AB and I'm going to reduce my excise
selection to really focus on recruitment.
And then I'm going to go back to that would actually create atrophy if they do that because they
would lose the stimulus on the fibers that they're not training by the exercises that they're not
doing.
Yeah.
And so like you said before, what you could simply do in that case you've been doing a a is you're
just splitting a, a across.
You'd literally literally just split the exact work out across and and use that to kind of drop the
Rep range down a little bit.
Aim for heavier loads, try and increase recruitment and that would probably be as far as you could
go in that scenario.
So maybe you were doing 16 exercises, or you're doing 14 exercises, one set of each, and now you're
going to do 7 exercises on A7, exercises on B.
You're still doing all 14 exercises that you were doing, you've just split them across 2 workouts.
The way I periodize, probably not dry work, but the way I change exercise selection across my groups
would be from one phase to the next.
I say probably 90%, maybe more of the exercises stay the same and the times I change the exercises
will be the first instance will be what you've outlined where it's effectively the same exercise.
It's a different piece of equipment.
It's a dumbbell or a barbell or whatever it might be, and I'll do that so there's some degree of
novelty.
Now as people become more familiar with the kind of stuff we talk about, they expect that less.
So I have to do that less than I used to.
I'll still do it a little bit maybe especially for more beginner intermediates, but I don't do it as
much.
The second time I do it will be if I've identified the same exercise but a better way of doing it,
and that if for me is the main time I'm now changing exercises.
Yeah.
So you're increasing stability or you're?
It's usually increasing stability.
Comfort issue or whatever it may be, yeah.
Yeah, exactly.
I I modify this set up in some way that's a little bit.
Yeah, more comfortable, more stable.
Effectively, it's the same exercise and then the only other time I change exercises is when I'm
focusing on Modi unit recruitment and I might turn that exercise into a unilateral exercise.
Yeah, because I think sometimes people get wrapped up in what unilaterals are doing.
So on the one hand, people will say to me, well, what's the point in doing, you know, a whole bunch
of unilateral exercises.
If I then go back to bilateral and I lose the recruitment benefit that I was getting on the goes
unilaterals and I start to lose the muscle growth that I was getting on those.
Well, yeah, that's going to happen.
But you would have gained access to more Motiene.
It's by training with those unilateral exercises.
Now you're going to have a higher recruitment in the future.
So really the unilateral stuff is kind of you can either sprinkle it into the start of your
exercises on for body A, A, a or you can go, you know, kind of full bore on it and do in the full
body AB programs when you're already trying to maximize recruitment gains in that period of time
anyway.
So I think there's a couple of ways of doing it, but that'll be the way I would say.
What else would you say about exercise selection and periodisation?
I feel like, I feel like there's not much more to it.
Is there?
Atrophy?
Once we explain atrophy, it's like, well, why would you do it?
I.
Mean, that's it.
I mean, ultimately I think where we've got to at the moment is that there's a group of people who
are really deliberately not paying any attention to the existence of voluntary activation deficits.
They're they're deliberately looking everywhere apart from this kind of body literature that shows
us that we can't recruit all the motions in a muscle at maximum levels of effort.
And, and, you know, they come up with all kinds of elaborate explanations and divert people's
attention away from this one thing that would actually show them that their entire argument about
all exercises, they think that all exercises for a muscle train every fibers in the muscle, which is
just not true.
But at the same time, they would argue that somehow, you know, changing exercises reduces the
fatigue on the muscle or, you know, I don't know.
I mean, they come up with all kinds of weird ideas.
But yeah, basically the voluntary activation deficit, it's show us that we're going to get different
muscle fibers being left out depending on the exercise we're doing.
And so we need to have as many exercises as is appropriate to capture as much of the muscle as we
possibly can.
And in many cases, you can get, you know, hugely effective coverage from just two exercises.
You know, it's not like we're saying, oh, you need to do 17 different exercises for the biceps or
something.
You know, you can probably get a very long way with, you know, 2 exercises per muscle group in all
honesty.
And three is probably going to capture almost everything apart from the most, you know, fractional
amounts in certain cases.
Yeah, of all the things, all the variables that are to periodise, I think periodising exercises
makes the least sense.
There's just no way that it's a win and I don't understand how it's something that's it's not just
still done, it's still the norm, like almost all.
Programs just look back over the last five years and see how what training programs were like five
years ago.
So pre and post stimulating Rep model being popular, you know, when before stimulating that model
people were doing all kinds of crazy stuff.
And now five years later, a lot of people are starting to train much more.
I mean, The thing is a lot of people look at TikTok or they look at, you know, some parts of
Instagram and they go the fitness industry is literally going completely crazy.
Now.
The science based lifting is just, you know, absolutely nuts and people are just out of control.
The thing is they're just seeing the tip of the iceberg of the most kind of crazy bits.
The reality is if you look at science based lifting, yes, you will find that some people are pushing
the boundaries of what is possible within the model, which is really interesting to see.
But because it's new and novel and exciting, they get the most attention.
So you get a really false impression of what science based lifting actually looks like.
If you look at what most people who are listening to this material and, and, and trying to engage
with this material, they're actually doing, they're programming a lot more like the silver area
bodybuilders.
They're starting to see three times a week programming for all muscle groups.
We're starting to see full body becoming the norm rather than kind of a really weird thing that only
begin do.
Yeah, well, totally.
I mean, that's it, isn't it?
And and and we're starting to see single sets becoming, you know, advocated by really high profile
researchers.
You sent me a link just the other day.
You know, people are saying single sets or up to three sets per workout is fantastic.
And yeah, it is.
You know, it's pretty much bang on what the silver era guys were doing.
So I think that there's a, you can get a false impression of, of the state to the fitness industry
at the moment by looking at some of the really wild.
And I'm not saying that they shouldn't be doing that because I think it's called push boundaries and
try stuff.
And especially when you've got space and capacity and, you know, energy like you have when you're 20
years old or whatever.
So, you know, I think it's cool.
I mean, it's cool to do that.
But I think it misrepresents what the vast majority of that movement is about, which is about just
kind of getting back to a silver air type programming routine, which is full body, you know, kind of
three times a week, covering pretty much every muscle group every time with, with very low volumes.
And I think that's very, very cool to see that change.
Yeah.
So I think it's in a pretty good state to the moment.
I think people just get a false impression from false on social media.
Yeah, yeah.
I mean, social media is probably not the best litmus test for how effective.
I guess like a a model or an approach of doing something is like, you know, obviously the the
representation of a of science based lifting on social media is not very accurate compared to what
most people are doing.
The the problem is people have this bias, which is what you see is all there is.
So it's famous Daniel Kahneman thing.
So you look at social media and you think that it represents everything that you that exists in the
world.
So you look at a bunch of people who are very popular for posting, you know, kind of really crazy
experimental stuff and you're oh, that's what the science based lifting movement is all about, doing
crazy experimental stuff.
Well, no, it's not.
It's actually about doing, you know, kind of.
Recoverable type multiple times per week to get a maximum that hypertrophy stimulus across the whole
week without accumulating fatigue and without missing muscle fibers out that you haven't trained.
I mean, essentially that's what periodization, that's the issue with periodization.
All this whole conversation has been about we don't want to atrophy between phases.
That's pretty obvious.
Like if your goal here is hypertrophy, you don't want to be atrophying those muscle fibers and
changing exercise selection literally will do that.
And the other goal is, well, you want to be able to recover so you can maintain access to those mode
units.
And so from that perspective, periodization of Rep range is the least problematic because you know,
if you keep exercise the same and you keep volumes sort of low and similar, then I mean, yeah, with
light loads you are going to be pushing the boundaries of your recovery capacity.
But OK, if you modify volume down a little bit, then that's OK.
So if you take account of the more damaging effect of light loads, you can actually, if you wanted
to train with blocks of lighter loads, so like, you know, 15 to 20 Rep maxes, if you really, really
wanted to, you can do that.
I mean, yeah, yeah, I think you're going to have to drop down to single sets in that scenario, but
you can do that.
But if you are doing single sets, man it opens up you can you can get away with a lot.
So with the appropriate full body kind of three times a week or full body a, a split, you can
absolutely kind of just cover periodization of Rep ranges.
If that is something that you really, really want to do.
Or if you feel that that helps you, you know, kind of with your client relationships because they're
expecting some degree of novelty, then absolutely can work in the paradigm.
Periodising volume has a very tiny window.
Really tiny.
Very very tiny window.
And periodising exercise selection also has a really, really tiny window you've got which is.
Effectively none.
No, you've got the, you know.
Within AB, yeah.
Well, no.
You've got unilateral, bilateral and you've also got the ability to just change implement that
you're using.
You can kindly.
Very limited window.
Around it.
So they're the most limited window, I'll give you that.
It's the most limited window.
Volume is the next most limited.
And then, you know, it's like reminds me of that scene in a Quentin Tarantino film with Brad Pitt
where he's talking about how much Italian they all speak.
And it's like I speak the most, there's like 3 words.
That's like the most limited.
So you got the most limited amount of kind of ability to use exercise periodization.
Yeah, it's really, really limited.
Well, I had this maybe six months ago.
I had this realization around periodization where I thought I realized repetitions is basically the
only thing I can actually periodize and not screw you up.
Yeah, pretty much.
And it was actually liberating to an extent because there is a lot of fear.
I do see this online of going moderate reps, high repetitions, and I think realizing, well, hey, if
your exercise selection stays the same and you use recoverable volumes, if you want to do that, you
can do it.
You can do your 15 repetitions, go up to 20 repetitions, don't go higher than that, but you can do
that.
And if someone enjoys it or someone wants like, you know, I know for me, I love not having to put a
gym pen on a machine and allow myself just to RIP out the stack.
And I might get 15 to 20 repetitions on some exercises, but just the mental effort, having to go
find the gym pin.
I got a hate gym bags.
I hate gym bags.
Having 40-5 different things in a gym bag and having to like go through it all and try to find that
little gym pin that's like covered underneath everything else I've got in my gym bag.
I just hate doing it.
So allowing myself to do high repetitions, I loved it.
It was so liberating.
But yeah, these other variables, I mean, obviously we're talking about periodization, that the goal
of periodization, why someone would do it is they think they're achieving a different adaption
that's going to enhance the primary adaption they're trying to achieve, which is hypertrophy.
And you've talked through each of those variables.
And ultimately, you've come to a point where you said the only adaption, unless I've misheard you,
the only adaption here that's actually going to enhance your ultimate goal of hypertrophy is mode
unit recruitment.
The only, the only mechanistic and the only evidence as in outcome data that exists for the concept
of phase potentiation in this in this zone of of the Internet, this zone of the exercise size
showing there's you can do it for athletic performance in different ways.
But as far as we're concerned, the only thing is motor unit group, there's no evidence that any
other adoption can have any positive effect on future adaptations.
And that's partly because it genuinely does have a clear rationale for increasing access to more
muscle fibers.
At the same time, it's a resistant adoption.
So if you've got both of those things that you know clearly helps and it clearly stays around for a
long time, you've got both of those things, then yes, a block of training that magnifies that
adoption will help you in the future.
If and you've got an adoption that doesn't really have a clear benefit or has no evidence or no
mechanistic rationale for a clear benefit, which things like polarization do not do, they do not
have those.
Despite what people will tell you, there is no mechanistic reason for compilerization helping
because it's a, it's an adoption that's pulled into existence by fibre size increases, not something
that pushes fibre size increases to occur.
And also it's not going to stick around as long as motor unit recruitment gain.
So if you haven't got those two things, you're not going to have a benefit in future blocks.
So that's is, it's just motor unit recruitment really, Yeah.
Yep.
And you can be achieving increases in mod unit recruitment at the same time you're achieving
hypertrophy and you don't need to periodize.
But if you want to push the lever and really focus on Modi unit recruitment without compromising
hypertrophy because that's obviously the main adaption we're going for.
So you still want to be maintaining exercise selection etcetera, then you can do that.
You can alternate.
You can have one phase Modi unit recruitment focus, one phase that's a little bit more stimulus
focus, a little bit higher stimulating volume.
You can do that.
But that's the only way I can see that someone could effectively periodize for hypertrophy.
And it's still not necessary, but that's what effective periodization would look like for
hypertrophy, yeah.
Yes.
I think that's it.
I don't think there's something else to add for hypertrophy periodization.
Mic.
Drop, say.
I would be super interested in people listening to this and then letting us know if they've got
effective periodization plans and models for hypertrophy.
And I'm assuming it's going to come back to what we've just concluded with there phases that are
focused on Modi unit recruitment and then phases that might be slightly high in stimulating volume.
But if you guys have thought about this creatively and you've got models of periodization you're
using, let me know because I, I love this stuff.
I think this is really interesting.
So if it makes sense, shoot us a message, let me know.
Yeah, I think it'll be cool to to see other ways that people have discovered.
But what I would also add is that, you know, I'm not going to look at people who people's programs
when they send me something and they've got like gigantic volumes in there and they claim that those
gigantic volumes are doing something because I'm just going to look at it and go muscle swelling.
I don't care what you think about, you know, some, you know, kind of new edema study that you think
demonstrates that edema is not happening.
You know, I've got a ton of data showing that edema is happening.
And until somebody replicates Cody Horn's study over that extreme volume training and shows that
intracellular and extracellular water aren't increasing over a high volume training program, then
I'm really not open to discussion on that topic.
OK.
Thank you guys for tuning in.
Let me know what periodization models or phases you come up with.
And if you've got further questions on periodization, both Chris and I do Q&A's weekly, so let us
know.