Episode: 057 Full Body A/A/A vs A/B, which is right for you?
URL: https://open.spotify.com/episode/7wFH6o67s1j6vXxNX41izz
Published: 2026-06-22
================================================================================

Welcome back to another episode and I'm a little bit puffed because I just experimented with an
exercise we're about to talk about, which is quite interesting and you guys will hear why.
So I'm getting ahead of myself.
Chris, how are you doing today?
I'm doing very well, thanks Jake.
Still got a bit of a frog in my throat, but it's not causing any problems.
OK, so you're you're coughing a little bit and I'm huffing and puffing.
So you guys get some additional audio pleasure today.
So I'm talking about a Steve Reeves plan.
Now this may be only I'm just checking my notes.
It might be only the second time we've covered a plan from Steve, and wow, it is.
And the first plan we covered was 52 episodes ago, a year ago.
So we've gone a whole year without talking about Steve.
So here we go.
Now I want to say a couple of things about this plan.
Usually when I give you guys a plan, it's coming from a magazine or it's coming from maybe a, a book
or like a booklet that these these bodybuilders authored.
And generally they would have been published in the 40s, fifties, depending on, on, you know,
whatever plan we're looking at.
And as much as possible, I try to go back to the primary source.
So I know that the plan hasn't been changed and adulterated over time.
Now the plan I'm going to share today, I have not been able to verify what date this was published.
It's I've seen different dates online.
And I actually want to talk with that because what's really interesting I find interesting.
You guys may not, but when you look at some of these old school bodybuilders and we look at say you
Google, hey, you know, what kind of training did Steve Reeves do or whatever?
A lot of the time you see things pop up which I would say a little bit questionable.
And I don't know where those come from.
And, you know, sometimes they might come from later interviews.
They might come from, you know, maybe sort of people have remembered the type of training that they
saw them do.
And then, you know, decades later, they've written them down.
And the plan I'm going to discuss today, I've been able to find multiple iterations of this plan
online.
And I found one version which was actually sort of published by someone who is quite well known in
this historical kind of space.
And the plan that he published was significantly higher volume than this version, which I've founded
at another source.
And so it's interesting for me at least to look at some of these plans.
And for example, a common Steve Reeves plan that you might see on Google involves 9 sets per muscle.
And you look at some of these plans and then it would be easy to make the assumption these lifted
back in the 40s and 50s were doing very high volumes.
But then when you actually find what was the first time we see that plan actually cited or or
listed, and in fact that plan comes from in the the late 90s, then it makes me question was the
bodybuilder really training that way?
Is that has this sort of been hyped up over decades?
Has this person kind of gotten carried away with the the way that the golden area's gone and then
that's influenced their memory of how they used to train and what's going on?
So I just wanted to start with that caveat because again, I don't know the date for this plan.
I don't know if it has changed at all from what Steve's Steve had done.
But I have seen photographs of Steve doing performing almost each of these exercises we're going to
talk about in this routine.
So to some extent he would have done a routine similar to this and probably somewhat similar to this
outline because again, it has been recorded by multiple different people.
So let's talk about the plan.
It is a full body A, a, a routine.
So down three times per week.
Ha, So a bit puffed.
So the first exercise is an incline dumbbell press.
Now he did this supposedly for three sets and 1st Steve, most of his exercises he did 8 to 12
repetitions for his upper body stuff.
Lower body tended to be a little bit higher, usually 12 to 15 or 10 to 15 thereabouts.
So that's represented in in kind of every exercise here except for calves.
So inclined dumbbell press, which Steve loved and apparently he could do like I think 60K dumbbells
for many reps, 12/15 reps, something like that.
There's there's photos of him doing that.
Then we've got the breathing front squat.
Now this is interesting because front squats tended not to be as common in the silver area.
They tended to do more back squats.
And so this was also done for three sets of 15.
So the the breathing squat obviously was done with a a break between repetitions where you would
breathe deeply.
And then he superseted this.
This is an interesting little twist.
He superseted this with a dumbbell fly.
Generally people would do the back squat, superset it with the pullover.
And obviously the idea, the way the silver airlifters did it, they thought they were expanding the
rib cage.
They didn't tend to go that heavy with that, the pullover.
In this case, he probably didn't go that heavy with the dumbbell fly.
And then he went into a seated barbell curl, which I don't think I've seen a photo of him doing
this.
I'm not sure.
Presumably if it's a seated barbell curl he's he's just going halfway down to his knees obviously,
but I haven't seen a photo evidence of this.
And then he did a alt.
Alternating dumbbell front raise for two sets, A bent over barbell row for two sets.
A bent over 1 dumbbell row for two sets.
Alternating lunges for a single set.
So we're pulling legwork back in after having the squats at the start.
And then the exercise which made me puffed was an alternating dumbbell front raise while lying flat
on the floor face up.
So lying face up, dumbbells by your sides and doing a front raise all the way up to your hand ends
above your head, and then coming back again, which we'll talk about in a moment.
And then he went into a good morning, a barbell, good morning for just a single set of 15
repetitions.
And then a seated or seated or standing dumbbell French press.
So like a, a standing or seated dumbbell extension overhead.
And that was done for three sets of 8 to 12.
And then the leg press, calf raise.
And that was for a single set of 30 to 40 repetitions.
And then it concluded with a bench, a standard, I think wide grip bench, 2 sets of 8 to 12
repetitions.
So we have 13 exercises, most of them done well.
Everything is done from one to three sets depending on the exercise, and most repetitions 8 to 15,
except for the cars.
What's standing out to you there?
So obviously we have some hamstrings work in this program, which is nice, even though it's only a
single set with the good morning.
It's funny that it's a single set, single set of a single hamstrings exercise.
It's like, you know what?
I've realized we've neglected this muscle.
Don't want to put too much into it, but let's just do a single set.
And in terms of back work, I'm guessing the bent over row is probably a wide grip and the one arm
row is probably a narrow grip.
So it's.
No, I wish I could say that that was usually the the photos I've seen of Steve doing it.
He does do a little bit closer grip for the barbell row compared to what moist lifters were doing
the silver era.
So maybe that's actually four sets as I just were playing rows.
But anyway, so at the very least there is some kind of back lat work in there.
There's some hamstrings workout work in there, which is where I always start just to check with
these programs if there's anything of that nature really, apart from the curious front raise
exercise that you were testing a moment ago, most of the rest of the programme looks more or less
what we would see in a lot of the other Silver Area programmes, with just the proviso that we've got
two or three sets for most of it for each exercise rather than single sets.
Generally, I tend to feel like we get a lot of single set programmes, but that might just be what
you pick out.
As you say, front squat is interesting because it tends not to be the variation that is chosen most
of the time.
And then I think the point that you raised when you were looking at it at the very beginning before
we jumped on the podcast is that there's a lot of chest work in this programme, which I think
probably dates it a little bit.
I think that probably puts it to the back end of the silver ear rather than the sort of beginning.
Because generally speaking, with the beginning of the silver era was still kind of borrowing from
the kind of bronze, the, the sort of the, the sundial kind of period when sort of chest work really
wasn't a priority.
It's more shoulder work.
The first Steve plan that we did a year ago was published in 1951 and it had three different chest
exercises for a single set each.
So I would assume that this is probably similar time, if not later.
OK, so that's kind of what jumps out at me.
Format wise, so that first plan we talked about involved more than twice as many exercises as this
plan involves.
And essentially that first format was three different exercises per muscle.
Now here he's still got, really he's got about two exercises per muscle.
Obviously there's some exceptions there.
The lower body is a bit of an exception, you know, the one hamstrings exercise or one calf exercise.
His first?
That first plan we talked about had multiple calf exercises.
With the exception of the chest, yes, because with the chest, yeah, the inclined dumbbell press and
the bench press is you'd kind of two solid kind of exercises that we would expect.
And then he's got these two front raise variations as well.
Yeah, which then you could argue is made it a little bit light on shoulder wise.
So this is.
The point I was making it it kind of for me, it dates the program.
Yeah, yeah.
But nonetheless, you can see some kind of rationale into how he's I guess sort of selecting these
exercises.
He's, it seems to me like he's mostly going with kind of two exercises per muscle, Some of the
simpler muscles, biceps, he's got 11 exercise in there, hamstrings, one exercise in there, calves,
one exercise in there.
So, you know, I think there's a bit of a, a bit of a structure he's following in terms of exercise
order.
He's he's kind of got the lower body stuff towards the end, with the exception of the breathing
front squat at the start ish.
You know, he, he concludes with the bench.
I'm not really sure why that bench is the last exercise he's bookended.
I mean, maybe this was in his mind a chess specialization phase.
He's bookended with chess at the start, chess at the end, and then also some chess in the middle.
So it is.
It is very much chest heavy.
Yeah, I don't think it's the favorite, my favorite program out of all the ones we've seen on this,
on this journey that we've been on it.
It doesn't have a strong logic to it.
I'm not really seeing a lot in there that I really like.
I mean, as I always say, you know, with these programs, they're generally 100 times better than
anything you'll find kind of being presented in, in the mainstream fitness industry today.
But this is definitely on the lower end of the, in my view of the of the programs that we've covered
on this podcast.
So what?
What do you specifically not like?
And then let's talk about how we would potentially modify it today.
So I don't like front raisers as a as a kind of general rule.
I think that they're unstable in most cases.
Fine, if if you're using a machine to make it work, then cool, no problem.
But most people are.
If I'm talking about front raisers with dumbbells, which is the context of a silver era programme, I
think they're not really that great.
I'm not a fan of lunges in bodybuilding situations.
I've talked about lunges on the other podcast that I do with Rob.
I think there's a specific kind of set of scenarios in which I would use them and they're not even
then, even in athletic context, I don't wouldn't program them very regularly.
So I'm not I'm not a fan of that.
As everybody knows, I'm not a fan of bent over Rose.
So generally speaking, there's a big chunk of the exercises in this program that I'm not actually a
fan of.
I'm not a fan of, of spamming sets.
I'd rather do a greater variety of better exercises than than have like, you know, two or three sets
per exercise, which is something we're going to talk about probably later on today.
And so, and I don't see any particular logic in the way that the workout is constructed.
Like you were saying, it's like, why is there some chest at the beginning?
There's some chest to the middle just at the end.
What is the purpose of doing breathing squats at the beginning?
And then you've got like sort of other legwork, like the, the like the lunges kind of 8th in, in the
series 8X after 8 exercises, you've got that.
So where, where, where's the logic, what, what's trying to be achieved here?
And so for me, there's a lot of little weaknesses like that.
Now, as I say, repeating myself, it's a really solid programme that will work way better than most
other programmes you're going to see on the Internet.
But just in terms of ranking it against other silver era programmes, for me it comes out in the
bottom quartile.
It doesn't really reach even halfway for me.
There's some obviously there's some plans we see and but just like band that just makes so much
sense.
I see what you did there makes perfect logical sense and it's a format I would use today.
I can appreciate that's probably not the case here.
There are some things I do, I do like.
So if we view this through the lens of it being a chest focus plan, which I assume it must have been
given the excise selection here.
So he started with chest.
OK, cool.
That makes sense.
I I'm pretty sure he would talk about incline being his favorite chest exercise, saying this worked
really well for him.
So he selected what he seems to think is his best chest chest exercise and pace it first.
OK cool that makes sense.
Then he's put the squat exercise.
So if we assume when we talked about this a little while ago, when I see silver airlifters use a
breathing squat, typically what I see is they either place it first or they place it last.
And I think you could probably make an argument for either.
You know, I like the idea of placing it last where there's not going to be other exercises that are
going to be impacted by that sort of, you know, cardiovascular demand.
And obviously, it's a, you know, the front squat, probably the most coordinated complex exercise
he's doing.
OK, You could argue maybe placing it at the start less fatigue might, you know, it could be an
appropriate sort of methodology there as well.
So he sort of has done that.
He sort of put it at the start, but he put his focused muscle excise first.
Then we see he's the the flies, you know, let's sort of maybe ignore that.
That's just sort of their whatever they they sort of thought was happening there.
He wasn't going to be heavy with that anyway.
So then he's put in a barbell curl.
So he's he's now after his very exhausting sort of, you know, cardiovascular Mani squat.
He's put in biceps and then coming out of the biceps, he's got his another chest exercise.
So he's actually given himself a little bit of a break there, allowed himself maybe to recover a
little bit in terms of cardiovascular man and now put in his focus exercise again.
And, and that probably makes more sense with the chest exercise there than immediately after the
squat.
So I, you know, I think there's some logic to some of this.
Even the two there, the exercises where he selected 2 sets versus the exercises where he selected
three sets versus one set.
Most of that kind of makes a little bit of sense when he's doing 2 exercises with the same muscle
that are fairly similar.
They tend to be more 2 sets with the exception of the chest work.
But you know, aside from that, the, the benefit row, the, the one arm row, two sets of each instead
of doing three sets, which is, you know, ugly going to push him beyond recoverability.
You know, I think there's some stuff here that that kind of makes sense of the car phrase.
He's doing a single set, but he's doing such high repetitions, it makes sense just to do that single
set.
So I think he's, there's been some, you know, intuition here that makes sense.
I want to talk about that, that lying dumbbell fundraise.
So you said you don't like fundraisers, particularly because they're sort of naturally a fairly
unstable exercise and fundraisers are one of my favorite exercises to experiment with because of
that.
I love trying to get in the gym and funny.
How can I make this a, a more stable and, and maybe a better exercise?
And especially what I like about it is sometimes you do get people who might have, you know, issues
with sort of niggly elbows and training the chest in certain ways might be more difficult.
And I kind of like this as a variation if we can do it in a suitable way for some of those people.
And when he's doing it lying down, he's getting like essentially the, if you look at where that
excise is going to be most challenging, it's going to be most challenging that very starting point
or the excise where his hand is by his side, by his waist, and then he brings his arm all the way
up, up above his head and then essentially stops on the floor there and then brings it back again.
And so there's these two points where it's going to be quite challenging just in terms of where that
external moment arm is longest.
And what's really interesting now this is this ultimately becomes a super chest exercise.
It's both upper and lower chest.
It's it's basic 2.
Exercises.
Yeah, yeah.
Talk to us about that.
So basically you've got a peak effort point when the dumbbell is resting by your sides in the
anatomical position, and then you, as you raise it to 90°, that's technically the end of one
exercise and really you'd be lowering it back down again.
But he doesn't do that.
He carries on all the way over to the other end.
So you're then creating another kind of exercise which is bringing your arm to the ground, but now
ground above your head, not the ground by the sides of your body.
So you end up then basically with your hardest part of the exercise first.
So we divide it into two exercises.
The hardest part of the first exercise is when you're breaking the inertia of the dumbbell off the
ground by the side of your body.
That is going to be a largely clavicular Peck exercise.
When you come overhead and then go back all the way to the ground and then you break the inertia of
the ground in that direction.
It's now going to be what looks like a pullover.
So it's going to be kind of a coastal Peck exercise with twice its bracky long head, you know, and
kind of maybe posterior delt in there as well.
So you've kind of got 2 exercises going on, which is really, really interesting because you could
potentially fail at either end and you would then kind of depending on the discrepancy in your
strength levels, you might find you end up not really training One Direction at all.
It becomes one exercise that like one exercise that's actually taken to Max effort and another
exercise which you may not achieve.
Unless unless you got to that failure point and then you sort of grabbed the dumbbell, moved it to
the other place and then did continue to do half reps.
Yeah, but someone may have a.
They may actually be fairly balanced and may come close to failure at both points simultaneously.
So it might just depend on a person how effective that exercise is for both Cliviclaire and coastal
pair.
It's very interesting.
I if again, I've tried it once, but it felt, I mean, obviously you're stable, you're lying on the
floor, your body's not going anywhere.
I try to do.
A fairly long lever arm.
That's the only issue.
So why is that an issue per SE?
So it's going to wobble around a bit, that's all.
So what you're going to find is that because the kind of point of resistance is the entire length of
your up, you know, arm complete arm all the way to the gripping point.
You're going to find that it does feel a little bit like there's a bit of wobbliness at the kind of.
And that will therefore cause your brain to think about the coordination of that movement and that
will therefore drag a little bit away from the motor equipment you're capable of devoting.
Now, as you say, the rest of your body is on the ground.
So it's not going, it's not like these movements that I complain about all the time in the athletic
context where people are kind of standing up and they've got a kind of single arm kind of cable
movement and they're waving the cable around and their only point of contact is the feet on the
ground.
And I'm like, this isn't doing anything because the entire body is so far away, sorry, the points of
contact with any point of stability, stability is so far away from the actual kind of joint tax as a
rotation that you know, your entire body is focused on not falling over rather than actually moving
the weight.
So it's not as bad as that, you know, but you will find that it's not quite as good as, say, for
example, doing a lateral raise in the machine.
Or you quickly when I would do this, I would do it either with machine or latter rays and just turn
sideways.
Or I would do it with a cable, a single arm cable.
And I would bear hug the column of that cable and make myself one with the column so that there's
you, you brace up against it.
But this, yeah, I think this is interesting.
Again, this is one of those homemade tasks.
If you guys want to give it a go, film it, tag us.
Let us know what your thoughts are.
We had a few a few people a couple weeks ago.
When we talked about the car freeze shrug variation.
Shrug in the car.
And what interesting feedback on that.
I don't know what feedback you got, but about half the people who messaged me about it said that it
worked really well for them.
And then the other half were like, Nah, didn't work.
And the main issue that they seem to be running into was the loading capacity and that for people
who didn't need too much load, it seemed to work well.
I gave it a go Personally, I struggled a little bit.
Again, loading was a little bit challenging and almost tipped over the machine.
That didn't work well, but I think it might come down to the particular machine and how much you
need to load it.
The other variation we talked about was with the barbell on the back like a squat and doing a shrug
that way.
I had fewer people message me feedback on that.
Only two people and they both seem to enjoy it, but I, I haven't actually given that one a go again
since we talked about it.
So again, let us know.
You know, this is interesting to us.
I love to hear the feedback on some of these old school exercises.
Did you have any other feedback on it?
No, I had the same feedback that you did basically.
So what would you do to make this plan better?
Just excise selection.
Really.
I would, yeah.
I, I, I, I really think it's better to nail the excise selection down and, and not spam sets.
I think that's definitely the right way to go and I would fiddle with a couple of the exercises.
I mean, obviously, you know, I think hamstrings, you know, we've got some hamstrings work in there,
but it's a bit limited.
I'd have a little bit kind of more of a focus on that and back work is not brilliant.
So I'd tweak that.
You know, other stuff would be mostly about preferences.
So I think what I'm objecting to is is the as you say, if it, if it's, if it's expressed as a a
chest focused programme even then I probably wouldn't write it the way it's written.
I think I would probably I don't like the excise selection particularly on that on that.
I can see where he's going with it.
But I definitely would choose my exercises to be a bit more stable than the front raised variations.
And I'm not sure that the volume of sets, if this is being done three times a week is appropriate.
And chest is one of those muscles that you really don't want to overdo the volume for.
So I think again, I think I'm probably overreacting in terms of my designation as a as a fourth
quartile program simply because it wasn't presented initially as a chest specialisation routine.
If you'd LED with that, I'd be like, I'd be judging it against chest specialisation routines and I'd
probably have taken a slightly different emotional kind of reaction to it.
But yeah, that was kind of where I started from and that's kind of why I gave it to an an
instinctively low rating.
Again, in the context of silver era programmes, which are still 10 times better than what you're
going to see, you know, post 1955 across the vast majority of the fitness industry.
Yeah.
OK.
So moving on, we are going to talk about how do we structure this?
What?
How do we we want to talk about mostly different ways to program full body.
Yeah.
So the question that I get so much, the practical question I get so much is which of the two kind of
full body three times a week routines should I go for?
Should I do full body A and do the same work out each time or should I do full body A/B, A/B, A/B?
So essentially just kind of have a two different workouts and alternate them.
And really, I think that's a really cool question because it's, yes, there are inevitably going to
be things that we talk about in this conversation that are kind of responding to the critics because
there are critics of both of these kind of programs.
And you know, kind of we can do that as we go along.
But fundamentally, I like this topic because it it kind of starts in a positive place and ends in a
positive place.
It's like we're describing 2 totally valid, full body 3 * 3 * a week programs that you can choose.
And it's like both of them are great, but why would you pick one over the other?
I think that's really the topic I wanted to cover today in this in this context.
But yeah, we can.
We can go down rabbit holes as we go along.
And I've got a couple of things that I'd like to comment on wherever they might fit, simply because
I seem to be getting a lot of questions on those things at the moment.
But I'll try and kind of work them as we go along.
Yeah, I think that's a cool starting place to say that You know what we are going to be talking
about times where you might want to use one of these or the other and both have application and you
know to be transparent like I use both full body A, A, A and AB alternating and I've got groups that
use both of those.
And so we don't think that you know, one of these doesn't make sense, isn't going to work,
absolutely not.
It's it's going to come down to the person to goal and purpose at that point in time.
Obviously the alternative to full body A, A, A or AB alternating would be ABC and we're not
particularly talking about that.
Maybe it'll pop up as we give some examples, but that would be a program that we would think isn't
going to naturally work as well as these other formats.
You know, obviously people are quoted as saying the hypertrophy is forgiving and yes, you can kind
of do just about anything and achieve some muscle growth more or.
Less O OK, I mean, but equally I've I've had a lot of people message me since perhaps they discover
the podcast for the first time or they stumble across mostly your work rather than my work.
But I think they quickly discover that I'm somewhat more approachable on Instagram than you are.
And they comment and they say, oh, I was doing body parts split because I thought that was what, you
know, bodybuilders did.
And I got stronger, but I never got any bigger.
And then I started training for body three times a week, and suddenly I started growing.
And I'm like, yeah, because I purchased maybe is forgiving if you are at least training the muscle
twice a week.
But if you're not training the muscle twice a week, then it ceases to become forgiving.
Yeah, true.
A full blown grow split where like one muscle's not at all getting trained in another day.
Yeah, there's certainly ways to stuff it up, absolutely.
But there's also a lot of ways where you're still stuffing it up and you're still going to get some
muscle growth, like, yeah.
Sure.
Like I've, I've, I've, I've said many times, I think the upper lower standard, upper lower split
than most people do where they're going in the gym four times a week and doing, you know, kind of
two up body workouts, 2 lower body workouts.
I don't think that's particularly good at many things, but it will work if that's what you want to
do.
You know, I mean, that's a great example of one of those programmes that like you're not stuffing it
up, but you could do so much better.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
So full body ABCI would put in that category where it's like there's, there's different amounts of
stuffing it up that you will be able to achieve with a full body ABC depending on how much overlap
you have within recruitment for certain muscles.
But there will be a natural level of forgiveness in it that you will achieve something and how much
you're able to achieve.
It's probably going to come down to luck, maybe to skill in terms of knowing how much overlap those
exercises have.
But you'll achieve something in a certain point, you'll probably plateau, and then you'll need to
more intelligently design that program.
So, Amy, so if we a a, a, Yeah.
If we start with like the kind of two variations that we've we've got on the menu, if you like,
we've got the the kind of same workout every time or we're alternating workouts.
Now, the reason that both of these are going to kind of work is that essentially you've got a
frequency for every single exercise in the program that is high enough to make sure that you are not
going to be losing all your gains by the time you get to the next workout, even if you only do
single sets.
So even if you're doing single sets for every exercise in your program, you will still make progress
across the week, net progress across the week.
That's not going to work if you're only doing kind of single workouts for an exercise, you know,
kind of once a week.
Even if you're doing, you know, kind of two or three sets for an exercise in an ABC program, you are
going to find that there are going to be some MOS fibers at the top end of the motor unit pool that
are not going to get sufficient stimulus across the week to be net growing across the entire week.
With AABA or a, an, a, a, a program, you will obviously be in net growth across the week even with
single sets.
So that's why we're starting with these two variations as being the kind of default options that we
think are, you know, appropriate.
So the differences that we've got basically obviously start out with the most kind of, you know,
visible difference with the full body a a, a program, you're doing every single exercise every
single time you go in.
So that basically means that you're going to get the fastest rate of growth on the muscle fibers
that you're training because you're training exactly the same muscle fibers every single time.
Now, of course, that also means that you're limited to a number of exercises that you can do in a
single workout.
And even if you're if you even if you feel that that is not a limitation.
So let's say, well, actually, you know, I can do 12 exercises or 15 exercises.
I mean, we've got people who are doing, you know, way more than that that we know.
But you know, let's say you kind of say, oh, no, actually I only want to do 12 or 15 exercises.
That's enough for me.
And a lot of silver area programs were that kind of number and that's cool.
I mean, you get a great physique with that number of exercises.
So you know, maybe say OK, but even then you will find that towards the back end of that training
day, you are going to be losing a little bit in terms of motivation, a little bit in terms of voting
recruitment.
You're going to find that maybe you're not quite hitting your absolute maximum levels in the kind of
motu mistakes in those particular parts of the workout.
And in which case you could now look at a full body A/B, A/B, A/B program.
And you could say, well, actually, if I just wanted those 12 exercises, I can now or 15 exercises or
16 exercises, I can now split those into two workouts of eight exercises.
And now suddenly I'm able to give so much more in terms of effort levels to all of those exercises
that I'm doing.
So you're kind of starting to say, well, rather than, you know, kind of aim for speed, which is my
kind of the, the, the, the thing that I can really get the most out of with a full body a, a, a
program, I'm actually going to go for quality of kind of effort level.
And I'm going to try and, you know, give the absolute maximum level of effort that I can to every
single set in that program.
And I'm just going to reduce how much I do in order to be able to hit really high quality sets for
every single thing that I'm doing in every single workout.
So that's kind of the way that I would start kind of thinking about it.
There's a lot there.
I'm just gonna make some observations and maybe give some pointers as to how where someone might
locate themselves on that spectrum.
You mentioned a lot of silly area plans have 12/13/14 exercises.
And as we've identified repeatedly, a lot of silly area plans and neglecting entire regions if not
entire muscles.
And so if someone says I want to maximally develop every single muscle, realistically they are going
to need more than 12 exercises.
You know, we can argue about what that exact number is, but really it's probably going to be 1516
plus.
So I think if someone's looking at, I think a starting point for someone be how many exercises do I
need for my goal of developing XYZ muscle?
And most people I think assume that their goal is to maximally develop every muscle.
I don't think it actually is most people's goal.
So I think that's a good starting point is realistically, what are my highest priority muscles?
OK, those are the ones.
And I'm probably going to need 2-3 exercises for what are my medium priority muscles?
OK, maybe 2 exercises probably suffice there.
And then what are my low priority muscles?
And probably 1 exercise.
And if there's something you really don't care about, maybe no exercises.
And so that will naturally start to kind of make it more obvious whether AAA is going to work or
whether maybe you do want to consider AB.
You then made the point of, let's say, let's say you've landed on 15 exercises and you can do that
as an A, A, A.
But as you've said, there's going to be potentially some reduction in performance in the tail end of
that those exercises even if done for single sets.
Do you think that reduction in performance is coming primarily from the number of exercises one is
doing or from the number of sets 1 is able to do in a workout?
And I know immediately you're going to be thinking about the variables.
A set is not a set, I know.
But if someone's asking this question, is the limit on how many exercises I can do?
Or what if I just do 5 exercises, but now I'll do three sets of each and I'm still doing 15 sets, is
that going to meaningfully change what you said?
That was the tail end of that workout.
So let me give a little bit of that kind of technical background and this will help me answer a a
common question that I, I've been getting recently as well.
So as I've said many, many times and we've talked about many, many times on this podcast, fatigue is
an externally measurable objective phenomenon.
So when somebody experiences a reduction in exercise performance as a result of a previous exercise
that they've done, maybe a set of exercise that they've done, that is what we call fatigue.
So if you are, for example, you know, kind of doing a couple of reps, maybe you're working in a sort
of powerlifting kind of workout and you do a couple of Rep set and then you wait 5 minutes, 6
minutes, 10 minutes and you do another couple of Rep set and you match the same performance that you
achieved in your first set, then you are not fatigued.
You could say to me, ah, but I feel this.
I feel that I feel the other, I don't care.
The fatigue is the objective measurement.
Conversely, you could do, AI don't know, some kind of single arm kind of biceps curl or lateral
raises or something.
And you could do that say 10 reps, whatever.
And maybe maybe you don't feel anything.
Maybe you feel a little bit of a burn towards the end of the set and maybe it goes away kind of 30
seconds later and you're like, I don't feel anything.
But then I ask you to repeat the exercise and you drop 3 repetitions.
You are fatigued and you're like, well, I don't feel anything.
I don't care because the fatigue is the object of measurement.
There's just so many people running around with this idea that fatigue is a kind of phenomenon, or
it's a feeling, or it's something out there, or it's like it's a thing in your body.
It's like, no, it's a measurement.
That's it.
So I'm going to start with this kind of fundamental exercise science principle, which is that
fatigue is a objective measurement showing a reduction in exercise performance.
That's it.
What we're interested in is how it happens.
We're interested in the mechanisms that make it happen.
Why are we interested in the mechanism?
We're interested in mechanisms because they actually change the magnitude of the hypertrophy
stimulus.
So in the context of a strength training workout, when we do an exercise and it creates some fatigue
mechanisms, we have to then ask ourselves is that going to negatively impact on what comes next?
OK, so if I'm doing a, let's say for example, I'm, you know, picking kind of Steve Reeves workout
that we talked about earlier, I'm going to do three sets of incline dumbbell press.
So I'm going to do and they're like 812 repetitions per set.
I'm so I'm doing multiple sets, exactly the same exercise and I'm trying to keep the same form.
So hopefully I'm using pretty much the same muscle fibers throughout.
So I do my first set and I create some and I experienced some fatigue mechanisms.
Now they're going to be fatigue mechanisms.
There'll be 4 categories.
We've got superspinal CNFT, we've got spinal CNFT, we've got calcium I related T and we've got
metabolite related T So in terms of what those 4 categories do, spinal and superspinal basically
will reduce the level of motin that I'm capable of reaching.
Now the spinal will do that largely related to the individual muscle and there's arguments about
whether that's even as specific as motor unit or whether it relates to the muscle or whether it
relates to muscle regions.
But let's just say muscle for the for the for the time being and superspinal is global, it affects
the whole body.
So basically I've got reductions in motor equipment.
So if I'm doing.
Just while I'm doing this, Jake, if there's any point where you want to kind of jump in and kind of
make side comments, please wave at me because otherwise I'm just going to keep talking.
But I know this stuff here that I'm going through that you also have an interest in, in
communicating and explaining to people.
So, you know, please do kind of jump in.
So basically we're going to do three sets of these dumbbell incline kind of presses.
And when I do my first set, I'm going to accumulate some of these 4 categories of fatigue mechanism.
Now on the CNS side, as I said, we're going to lose some Moat improvements.
So just to be really, really clear, my second set of dumbbell incline pressures cannot have higher
recruitment than my first set.
That is axiomatic.
So there's so many really high quality strength training studies.
Well actually they're usually done in isometrics because we want to try and control as much as
possible showing that you do a subsequent set of high effort exercise.
You will never get the same level of recruitment you did in the first.
We always have CNS fatigue mechanisms that limit us.
So we know that there are people running around in the industry at the moment saying that as you do
multiple sets you get higher and higher recruitment.
That is absolute physiological impossibility.
It's not going to happen.
You are not going to do that, it's not happening.
So we're always going to lower recruitment.
Now, as I say, you've got two things to think about.
You've got the spinal and the superspinal.
The spinal would just affect the muscle you're training.
So if I were to do my incline presses and then I have to switch to do some rows, for example, I
would not have that spinal CSD problem in the rows, but I would have the superspinal.
Where does the superspinal CSD come from?
And it comes from any negative feelings that I'm experiencing at the point when I do the exercise.
Now that could be the burning sensation in the muscle.
It could be the cardiovascular feelings.
It could be just basic inflammation that occurs whenever we do muscular contractions.
All of it's going to create a slight increase in my sensations of discomfort that's going to bring
me closer to my maximum tolerable position of effort for the same level of motion improvement.
And that's going to mean that I hit my task failure point at a lower level of central mode and lower
level recruitment than I would have done if I hadn't had that bout to exercise, you know, just
before I tried my second attempt.
So my second set is always going to have a lower level of recruitment, both for spinal CNST reasons
and also superspinal CNTS.
But the spinal CNT will be muscle specific, whereas the superspinal will not.
So that's CNS fatigues.
I'm going to let you finish the metabolite bit and then I'm going to come back with a couple of
questions on that.
In terms of the local side of things, the peripheral side of things, we've got calcium I related
fatigue, we've got metabolite related T on the calcium I related T side.
Basically, if this happens, it's going to essentially reduce mechanical tension inside the muscle
virus and it's going to do that in a what we can kind of call a semi permanent way as far as the
workout's concerned.
So if I create some calcium and accumulation, let's say I do a 20 Rep set of some stretch position
exercise and 20 set, you know, 20 Rep set of say preacher curls, I'm going to produce a decent
amount of calcium and accumulation in the biceps muscles because of the combined high repetition and
stretch position.
That's then going to mean that if I do a second set of that, I'm going to get much subdued level of
mechanical tension stimulus in the working fibres because of that calcium ion accumulation.
Even if I left it 10 minutes, it would still pretty much be there.
So there's not really a lot of flexibility around the calcium ion related T mechanism category.
Once you've kind of triggered it, you kind of stuck with waiting for it to clear post workout
territory really rather than within workout territory.
Whereas that's contrasting from discomfort sensations which are associated with superspinal CST,
which you can pretty much just wait out if you really want to.
You can kind of give it 5-10 minutes, get some orange juice, come back and carry on and they'll be
gone pretty much.
So superspinal CST is definitely manageable if you have time and space around you to kind of walk it
off.
Metabolite related basically is the least problematic as long as it doesn't get to the point where
it triggers super spinal sensity because it does trigger sensations.
If you get enough metabolite accumulation, most of the time metabolites are just going to kind of
slow down shortening velocity and not really do anything else that is problematic.
Yes, there's some messy kind of elements of fatigue Physiology where it can start to interact with
calcium I related T, but for the majority of the time you can mostly ignore all of that stuff and
you can just say table I related T is largely going to be innocuous as far as hypertrophy stimulus
is concerned.
So what we're saying then is you've really got three things to think about.
You've got spinal sinus fatigue working on the muscle to reduce recruitment in that specific muscle.
You've got supraspinal fatigue working to reduce motor recruitment across the whole body by acting
on the perception of effort.
And then you've got calcium ammo fatigue working on the individual muscle fibres that are exposed to
essentially high period, long periods of time being activated and or in stretch positions.
Now there's a really interesting analysis you can therefore do if you want to compare what happens
with those fatigue mechanisms across doing say three sets of exactly the same exercise and three
different exercises for the same muscle group, because the fatigue mechanisms will go in different
directions.
But let's pause there and see what it was you wanted to ask me about after I'd finished talking
about metabolize.
Well, we needed to cover them metabolize because as you've just said there, now we've got all the
moving parts to know how you know, if we're doing three sets of one exercise or multiple exercises,
single sets or full body or split.
Now we actually understand how all these different fatigues are playing into a different fatigue
mechanisms.
So in terms of the the CNS related fatigue, well in terms of all the fatigue mechanisms, if we rest
long enough between sets and between exercises, then exercises for different muscles, we can
actually mitigate almost all most of that fatigue.
So the fatigue that we can't mitigate just by resting long enough is going to be at a muscle level.
It's going to be a calcium and accumulation, Yeah.
So essentially that is the that is the one that we can't get rid of.
So if someone's looking at a program that has X number of let's say 15, either 15 exercises or 15
sets, either they're doing 5 exercises, three sets of each, or 15 exercises, one set of each.
Then by the end of that tail end of that workout, if they've not been able to rest long enough
between each set.
So if they've said, hey, I'm going to take 5 minutes to train every single set for all 15 sets and
they're going to be here for however long.
Then at the end of that workout, there shouldn't really be any super spinal much super spinal CNS
fatigue.
Maybe a little bit from information during the workout or whatever, but there may be reduction
motivation you get might get to a point where you're like, you know what, I've been in the gym for
half a day, I kind of want to get out and do other stuff and I'm not overly motivated to do my set.
And so my performance is still going to be lower than it would be otherwise.
So that would be 1 factor for people to consider.
Now, if the question becomes, well, what if I do five sets of three sets of five different exercises
or one set of 15 different exercises?
How does that differ?
It it, this might sound, I mean, this is kind of advanced stuff, right?
So if someone's listening to this and like you lost me at like super spinal CNS fatigue, then that's
OK.
We're going to, we're going to come back in 5 minutes time and it's going to and it's going to be
something valuable for you.
But if you're someone who's following us up until this point, I think this stuff gets really
interesting.
So then at a per muscle level, now we need to start looking at how much fatigue is associated with
each exercise for that muscle, right?
So if we're saying, well, we're going to do 3 different exercises and one of those is a lengthened
position exercise.
And we put that, say, third of those three different exercises, we've been able to largely knock off
a lot of that calcium iron fatigue.
But if we're saying, well, we're going to do three sets of one exercise and we've got a muscle that
needs a length and position because it does experience psycho myogenesis, let's say the chest.
We're not stuck doing three sets of length and position exercises that each one of those sets is
going to cause more and more calcium and accumulation and fatigue, right?
Yeah, I mean, I think you've you've kind of you jumped the advanced bit.
Let me let me fill in a few, let me fill in a few of the building blocks for people that want to
kind of get all the way through from the easy stuff to the difficult stuff.
So let me very quickly just walk through exactly how it's going to be different if I do three sets
of inclined dumbbell press versus say you know, three separate exercises for chest so or back or
elbow flexors or anything else, doesn't really matter.
Hamstrings.
So if we do three exercises exactly the same, then I'm going to do my first exercise and obviously
it's going to be the same in both cases.
So I've got no differences at that point when I do my second set of the exact same exercise, so I'm
doing 3 identical sets, what's going to happen is I'm going to have slightly lower levels of
recruitment for both spinal and superspinal reasons.
So I've got slightly low recruitment on both of those things.
And I'm also going to be perpetuating my metabolite accumulation, which is not a problem unless it
starts to, as I say, build to the point where it triggers superspinal, in which case it might be a
little bit of a problem.
And I'm also going to perpetuate the exact same calcium I accumulation.
So I'm going to make calcium I accumulation worse and I'm going to be targeting the same muscle
fibers that were calcium I accumulating before.
And that is going to mean that I have a, you know, kind of post workout muscle damage effect.
So This is why if you look at sort of post workout fatigue studies, they pretty much dose response
linearly with the number of sets per kind of muscle that you do when you're using the same kind of
exercise.
So you do like 10 sets of an exercise you can have in a pretty chunky amount of days worth of post
vocal fatigue as you're dealing with all of that kind of calcium and kind of accumulation that has
created damage.
If I now switch that up and go, OK, well, what happens if I do three different exercises for the
same muscle group and it actually trains different regions of the muscle?
Now, that's generally going to be the case in most situations.
Most of the time when you change and exercise sufficiently, as long as you're not like, you know,
kind of just doing I'm going to do a machine version of the exercise and I'm going to a free weight
version of exact same exercise.
OK, that's not bio mechanically that different, but if it is biomechanically different.
So let's say you're switching between you know kind of a narrow grip kind of bench presses to work
more clavicular or you're thinking about pullovers to work, sorry, coastal part of the peg.
Or maybe you're just doing kind of flies or whatever.
You're moving stuff around and you're trying to target different parts of the chest musculature.
So you do your first set to whatever it may be and then you come back and do a second set.
In that second set, you have got exactly the same supraspinal CNST problem as you had if you did
multiple sets of the same exercise.
There's nothing changing.
Spinal is very potentially different.
It could actually be less problematic if you're using a different exercise for the same muscle group
depending on just how different the motor pathways are.
If you're OK, super.
Spinal will be the same, Spinal either less than or the same.
It will either be the same or it will be slightly less than because if you're using really
fundamentally different chunk of muscle, let's say for example, you are working with the lats and
you go from frontal plane into sagittal plane.
The area of that you're using is so fundamentally different in that case that I would argue that
probably spinal CST is not going to be anywhere near as bad going between frontal and sagittal plane
exercises as doing 2 frontal plane or two sagittal plane exercises.
Chest, there's a little bit more of a kind of ironically, because most people go oh, back is back
and just training with on exercise.
But chest, they need like to be kind of focusing on all these different regions.
It's like actually chest, you can kind of capture most of it with a transverse plane horizontal kind
of flexion motion.
But you know, fundamentally if your regions are substantially different, then probably you're going
to have different motor unit kind of really quite different sense of motor units working.
You are probably going to have slightly less of a problem with with spinal censity.
But either way it's going to be as you say either the same or better.
You know, there's in less problematic if you're doing a separate exercise in terms of metabolites,
we're not really worried about those anyway.
But realistically you will find that if you're not accumulating metabolites in the same fibers, then
it will not create as much of A sensations.
It's less likely to trigger superspinal CSD.
You are more likely to get it, you know, simply going out into the bloodstream and being dealt with.
So I would argue metabolites, you're probably going to have a less likely, less likelihood of it
getting to the point where it triggers a sensation.
So we're talking about superspinal CMD being potentially also slightly less if you're changing
exercises.
In terms of calcium ion accumulation, calcium accumulation is where it gets really interesting
because basically calcium ion accumulation happens in every fibre, but the threshold of sensitivity
of a fibre for actually experiencing calcium ionic D mechanisms increases with increasing glycolytic
and decreasing oxidative capacity.
So the further up the motor unit pool you go, the less calcium ion accumulation is necessary to
trigger a calcium iolative team mechanism.
In fact, if you have a really, really glycolytic fibre, very few mitochondria, you can literally
just sprinkle a few calcium ions in there and you've got a problem straight away.
In contrast, you can have fibres at the bottom end of the motor unit pool which will literally just
ignore calcium ions pretty much indefinitely.
So what that means is that if you do an exercise which was, you know, kind of targeting a certain
number of moting, it's uncertain.
And right at the very top end of the moting pool is where everything gets different when you change
an exercise.
So if I'm doing one particular exercise and I change the other exercise, a lot of the lower stuff is
going to be kind of maybe decide a different order moting agreement, but you're going to be covering
the same kind of fibres as you get towards the top.
That's where it diversified and you get end up training totally different fibres at the very top end
of the motor unit pool.
Because ultimately that is what neuromechanical matching is doing.
It's punting fibres and motor units that are useless to it in a particular activity right off the
top end until you get into the voluntary activation deficit.
So ultimately when I switch exercises, I'm going to end up training different fibres and they're
going to be different high threshold muscle moti units with extremely glycolytic non oxidative
fibres which are going to then be damaged.
So what you're going to do is you're going to end up pushing the calcium and accumulation away from
the fibres that got smashed in the previous exercise into a different set of fibres.
So you're going to end up with probably the same overall amount of damage but in different places.
What does that mean?
It means that you are less likely to get a hypertrophy reduction in those fibres because you are
literally training different fibres and you're exposing them to calcine manicurism for the first
time.
Then you repeat that process when you do the third set.
So if you're thinking about doing multiple sets of the same exercise you are ending up with, just to
summarise what we've done so far, you're ending up with at least the same amount of super spafity,
if not a little bit more because of the metabolite issue that I mentioned.
At least the same amount of super spafity, if not a little bit more because of the metabolite issue
that I mentioned.
At least the same amount of super spafity, if not a little bit more because of the Motena variation
that I mentioned and definitively more calcium.
I'm rating in the specific fibres that you are trying to train at the top end of the Motena pool,
meaning that they get much, much less hypertro stimulus as you go from set to set because of that
reducing mechanical tension phenomenon that happens with calcium ion relative T mechanisms.
So ultimately what you can see is that doing multiple sets of exactly the same exercise is going to
be substantially less effective in terms of stomatity hypertrophy.
And also it's going to cause you a longer lasting post work app T problem because your calcium ion
relative T is not spread out across as many places.
This is something that I think is really, really interesting.
But fundamentally we've got some great data.
I mean, I, I get a lot of pushback when people say, Oh, well, we don't really think that, you know,
kind of different muscle fibers are being trained by different exercises.
OK, well, fine, we'll just do one exercise for every muscle group then, you know, just ignore
everything I'm saying.
But we have some great data showing that muscle damage is incredibly spatially localized after
different exercises.
Really great data.
And it actually then tracks through into the post workout period.
So if you look at the way that different muscle fibers actually change and obviously you can't do
this with a true for T measurement because you can't really do the biopsies that you need to do to
do fatigue measurements for that kind of number of fibres.
What you can do is use certain different for example, scanning measurements to look at the way in
which the individual muscle fibres are swelling in the post workout period.
And you can see different kind of scans will give you different regions of the muscle recovering in
different timeframes.
And really, really nice way of showing that the actual spatial localization of muscle damage after
different exercises is very, very different, which implies of course, that you're getting different
calcium accumulation in different areas, which of course is exactly what I've just described in
terms of the T mechanism working.
So there's actually some really, really interesting fundamental for zoological differences in the
way that three sets of the same exercise works versus three sets of three different exercises for
the same muscle group.
So obviously there would be some people who would say, well, you know, if you take an exercise to
fit to failure point, then there's going to be kind of maximum, maximum voluntary activation is
going to occur regardless of what that exercise is and there's going to.
Be why would anybody say that?
I mean, why, why would anybody say that when we, we literally, we literally have, we literally have
voluntary activation studies done in maximally stable scenarios with minimum amounts of muscle mass
that we did a whole episode on this.
We explained to people that if you are sitting in a dynamometer and you're strapped in, you've got
maximum stability.
So that's a level of stability that's above what you could ever get in a machine exercise in the
gym.
In that scenario, you're also minimising the amount of muscle mass you're using.
So you're using single leg, single arm, and it's a single joint exercise.
You're either doing a knee extension or you're doing a biceps kill and you're fully strapped in and
you've got minimum amounts of muscle mass working.
Even in that scenario, even in that scenario we have voluntary activation deficits during maximal
single efforts with no sensations because it's literally just start pushing as hard as you possibly
can with no, you know, 5678 reps before that.
It's literally maximum effort in a highly motivated scenario.
As I say, maximum stability, minimum muscle mass working and you've still got in the quadriceps 20
plus percent voluntar activation deficit and maybe 5% of the biceps.
So even in that scenario, which is way more likely to involve as higher recruitment than any gym
scenario you can cook up.
Even in that scenario, we've got voluntary activation deficits and like, and then people will say,
oh, well, we don't, we don't, we don't, we don't receive voluntary activation deficits.
So it must get a failure.
I'm like, you're not doing the reading.
It's it's, it's there.
It's just do the reading.
So, and I think this is a topic for another time, but I, I think some people would then say, well,
maybe you do multiple sets and maybe you're getting different muscle different, which is the.
Point I raised earlier, that's not what happens every single time you do repeated exercise bouts.
Moti necroman goes down.
It never goes up.
I think this is one of the reasons I'm, I know that you've kind of poked me about this in the past
and says, is this really something that you need to get too excited about?
I'm like, no, it is.
I get very, very agitated when people talk about priming and potentiation as being a motor unit
recruitment thing because it's not.
And people go, oh, well, I'm priming the nervous system, I'm activating.
No, you're not.
Every single bout of exercise that's ever been done in the history of humanity causes a reduction in
exercise, in emotion recruitment in the subsequent bout.
It never goes up.
Ever.
Not ever, Not once.
There is no scenario in which this idea of potentiation is a thing.
So when it comes back to that, because that will apply to my next question, but just before we get
there.
So where was I going to go now?
Let's let's let's go to that first.
So if you're saying every additional set, each additional set will only be going down and
recruitment not up, well, that would presumably apply not just to the same set for that same
exercise, but for a set for another exercise.
Which is exactly why I went through all of the fatigue mechanisms and said, look, you've got super
spinal fatigue because of sensations and you've got spinal CFT just because of usage of the motor
units in that kind of pathway if you like.
And that's why.
So let's say you've got an exercise, you've got two different exercises and there's, you know, a
degree of, of difference in, in recruitment.
And as you said, that first set, that first exercise is some fatigue that's occurring there.
And so you move to that next exercise.
Is not the difference in recruitment in that next exercise, is that not just going to be wiped out
by the fatigue that is present?
So if we're saying it's only the top X percentage of motor units that is going to be substantially
different, I'll be not just wiping out that difference because we're coming into that set with some
fatigue.
So you're always going to lose a little bit every time you place an exercise later on in sequence.
So this is what exercise order is, but the exercise order is something that every single person
constructing a multi exercise program has got to face.
So if the person who's saying, oh, I'm, I'm just going to do multi set protocols and I'm going to do
like an ABC routine, I'm going to do, you know, three sets of rows on a Monday and three sets of
wide grip pull downs on a, you know, sorry, three sets of transfers playing rows on a Monday, three
sets of wide grip pull downs, frontal plane on Wednesday and three sets of sets of plane cool downs
on a Friday.
And it's like, that's kind of been my program.
I'm like, yeah, but you're also training other muscles as well, you know, so you're going to have
some leg press in there, you're going to have some hamstrings in there.
OK, fine.
So every single time you do exercise earlier in a workout, the stuff that comes later is going to
have lower recruitment.
That's how exercise order works.
You've always got this reduction as you go through.
So everybody, irrespective of how you organise those, those kind of sets across your week, you are
going to have some exercises and sets that come later in the workout and some that come earlier.
And if you're doing say, for example, if all we're arguing about is where to apportion the exercises
in the week and we're agreeing that we're going to do the same total.
Like if I'm saying instead of doing three sets of transfers, playing row on a Monday, three sets of,
you know, wide grip pull down on Wednesday and three sets of narrow grip pull down on Friday.
If I'm saying I'm going to do 1 of each exercise, you know, kind of on all three days, we're
actually agreeing on the total volume across the week.
We're just disagreeing on the workout volume and the frequency allocation.
So we've got the same issue with all the other.
If I do that for every single exercise, every single muscle group, then you can end up having two
programs that we're comparing, one that's ABC and one that's either A, A, A or a B, A/B, A/B.
Like we're kind of hopefully talking about today.
Got massively sidetracked.
Ultimately, what we'd be saying then is we're literally just arguing about apportionment.
We're doing the same thing.
And what you're going to find, therefore, is that you've got an exercise order issue with the same
number of total sets per workout, and you're actually in the same issue.
By the time you get to the end of the workout, you've got the same exercise order problem in both,
in all three programs, really.
You're not different in terms of the problem that you're facing in terms of Superspan CNFT, it's
absolutely identical.
The question that you're specifically arguing is if I've got my kind of first back exercise, am I
going to find that my second back exercise now is essentially the same, doing the same thing as my
first back exercise because I've come down so far?
Well, no, because they're actually really, really different.
I mean, in the case of the three exercises I've just picked, they are massively, massively
different.
Transverse plane doesn't even work a lot, you know, it's a completely different animal.
You know, frontal plane disorder plane also is way, way more different than most people think, you
know, actually really, really, really different.
I mean, like if you look at the activation studies that we've got the EMG studies, I mean, I know
that the leveraged studies show big differences, but the activation studies, literally you, you
know, you've got like sort of half to 2/3 of the activation in one muscle compared to the other for,
for like the kind of thoracic versus the, the frontal plane versions.
So thoracic being sorry, sagittal plane and I'm lumbar being frontal plane, you actually have such
huge differences that you would say, well, you know, this is this is like bottom end of the high
threshold putting it Paul, not the top end.
You know, where I think it is more subtle is probably stuff, you know, kind of like like the PEC
where you've actually got all three regions working in transverse plane, you know, horizontal
flection.
OK, maybe you could change that very slightly or you know, move slightly towards the side of the
plane or slightly towards the kind of whatever you know and and you would get a slightly different
effect.
But that I mean the differences are just gigantic.
So yeah, I think you could find that in really sort of subtle changes, you might find that the you
you do cancel out that effect by by getting a bit of super span of tea.
But I think for most of the excise selection that we're talking about, the differences are are
pretty substantial.
Yeah.
I mean you talked about exercise orders.
So if we're if if one was saying that after the first exercise that you do, you then basically
because of fatigue blunt any difference in recruitment in any future exercise, then ultimately you
could say, well that first exercise matters.
But any exercise after that, you just pick any exercise for any muscle for the muscle and it doesn't
matter.
They're all going to do exactly the same thing.
If you believe that any variance is going to be totally eradicated by that little bit of fatigue,
and that would be a similar argument then for if someone's saying, well, any exercise is going to
cause maximum recruitment.
It's like, well, again, you know, if we look at how variant we see, you know, differences in in like
we use chess at the start when we talk about Steve and OK, you've got coastal and you've got
clinical apex that are doing opposing things.
Doesn't mean that if you do it and enough of of one of those actions, you're going to get the other
part of the chest, which is doing the opposite part of that.
Like, obviously not.
So.
Exactly.
What I think is interesting with that is if even if you did believe that if you do one exercise,
you're going to eventually get maximal recruitment in that muscle, which obviously in some of these
cases doesn't make sense, you're not.
There's nothing potentially better that you could get than doing multiple exercises for a single
set.
So there's a potential big downside, but there's no upside.
And then, you know, contrary or you know, on the flip side, if we talk about if we don't believe
that you're going to get everything there is to get, but we believe that the fatigue is blunting the
differences.
Again, there's no benefit to doing multiple sets over changing it.
Because even if you were saying, well, I'm going to use the same exercise to get more of a stimulus
in those mode units that are being used in that exercise.
Well, you're saying that the fatigue is going to blunt the the uniqueness of that anyway.
So in both of those scenarios, either you're getting the same or you're getting less than doing
different exercises yet.
Yeah, totally.
I mean, I think just going back one step to the point you made about, you know, kind of PEC
exercises where you where you're, where you're actually preventing one region from working because
it becomes an antagonist.
I think I think that's really, really important.
I think a lot of people overlook that.
They don't realise that if you're working in the social plane and you're doing either extension or
flexion, then you really are limited to only one region about working.
You actually can't get the other regions to work work in that scenario.
I mean, no amount of wanting it to happen will make it happen.
It simply will just refuse to do it because it actually can't do it.
You know, the coastal region can't do flexion and the cavicular region can't do extension.
So, you know, you're kind of stuck with what they can do.
Yeah, so if your ABC looked like a a family one day, a wide rib Mensch the other day, a pet deck the
other day then.
Although the same things exactly I mean.
Yeah.
But if you're, if you're starting to look at narrow grip kind of pressing, incline bench type
pressing with narrow grip, then you're starting to, it's starting to become a curricular exercise.
You can't get the coastal region to do that because it will be, it's an extended Sir.
So you can't make it do something that is the opposite of and the same thing.
If you start putting pullovers in there, you actually can't get the curricular reason to work while
you're doing a pullover because it's a coastal.
The coastal reason, the only reason has an extensive function, a curricula is a flexor function.
So I think, you know, you you'd have, if you wanted to make the argument that every exercise does
the same thing, you would end up having to pick a very small number of very, very biomechanically
similar exercises which that superficially looked different but weren't actually very different at
all.
And as soon as you start picking exercises that do have, you know, specific regional kind of
preferences to them, then immediately it becomes obvious that, you know, no amount of finessing
around the edges of Physiology is going to allow you to make that case.
Yeah.
Yeah, I think that's a good point.
If you wanted to use full body ABC to an extent you could, but you've just eradicated 75% of
exercises that you could be using because you're going to, to make that split work, you're going to
need to be using a very small number that are basically doing the same thing and recruiting the
entirety of that muscle in terms of its different regions.
Yeah, or you're just going to be ignoring how bio mechanics works.
I mean, which is probably what most people are doing.
So if you want to make it work, then you'd have to do it.
So we've got someone now who's decided, OK, there's 15 exercises I want to do.
And we've talked about really the ultimately the if you're going to have two comparable workout
lengths, it would generally work.
Like in terms of the fatigue mechanisms you've talked about, having a higher variation of exercises
with fewer sets is going to be the less fatiguing option.
But you still want to work out how many exercises do I either a need or do I feel like I can perform
well in a single workout?
And now what does that put?
What's the next step for that person?
They've got these 15 exercises that they want to do.
How do they decide?
Do I do these A, A, A or when is AB better for me?
So obviously we can simply just try the two options that we want to test and ultimately the person
that's doing A, A, A is going to have a longer workout, assuming that they and just to be clear,
actually, I don't think it makes sense to do A B A/B, A/B in order to do kind of more sets per
exercise.
I wouldn't go down that route.
You'd much better off doing hitting the if you've got the energy and motivation to do, you know,
multiple sets, just do for what EA a a as in do the same work every time and do single sets because
you're going to get much better approach to doing that and cutting your workout in half and just
doubling the number of sets per exercise.
That to me doesn't really make.
Sense So hang on.
So So what we're saying there would be if you were able, if you said, hey, I can do X number of sets
in a workout before I fill out my motivation everything tanks, then it wouldn't make sense to do
fewer exercises.
Let's.
Say you've got 16 or even 20 exercises that you want to do.
So you've got 20 exercises and you say, well, I'm going to do 10 exercises per worker and I'm going
to do 2 sets each, which is total of 20 sets.
I'm like, no, no, no, don't do that.
Do the whole lot.
Do all your 20 exercises every single time.
And that'd be way, way better hypertrophy across the week than because ultimately you're doing more
first sets for every exercise that you're doing.
But yeah, so, so the starting point of that, that sort of boundary would be saying if you can
tolerate more total sets and the total number of exercises you want.
To do 4 body a.
Then a, a, a is the answer for you, yeah.
Exactly.
But if you find that you give much more energy to your workout by doing 10 and split the workout in
two and do 4 body A, A/B, A/B, A/B, you know, and that could work really, really well.
Where I think that naturally then leads us to is to make the observation that you've made several
times before, which is that generally speaking, as a lifter advances, they're going to add exercises
in on top of what they're already doing, not the other way around.
They're not going to lose stuff.
They're going to add stuff in.
So naturally you'll find that instead of doing, if they started out doing 12 exercises or 14
exercises, they're going to start drifting towards the 20 and then maybe 22 or even more.
And then you're going to start saying naturally, well, do you know what I was doing for body A, A, A
and it was working well for me with 12 exercises or 14 exercises and now doing 22 and I'm just not
feeling it anymore.
So you split it and you do 11 and you do 11 on each day.
And then suddenly now you've got the same energy you can bring to the table and the protocol works a
lot better.
So I think what's going to happen for most people most of the time is that they're going to probably
spend, I'm not saying that this is going to be kind of like a natural progression.
It's always going to go in One Direction.
And they're naturally going to spend more time on forwarding A, A, A programs at the beginning and
naturally gravitate towards full body A/B, A/B, A/B programs as they reach the kind of kind of most
intense part of their career where they're trying to get the maximum amount of Muslim and hold it in
place.
And then probably as they kind of start to settle down into a retirement style mode, they'll
probably go back in the opposite direction.
That's at least been my experience.
But you know, equally you could do the same thing again as you get older.
You could again go back from formally A, A, A back towards formally ABA, not in order to add stuff
in, but in order to do less per workout.
And it gives you that recovery capacity at the top end of the motive pool, which you need.
And it just means that you can do a little bit, you know, fewer exercises per workout, which again,
is definitely something that you will appreciate as you get older.
So I think there's some really interesting zones here.
You could also do that, not just because you're getting older, but as an advanced lifter, that might
be a viable strategy as well.
So you could get to a point where, and we've talked about this where you might say, you know what, X
muscle, either either I'm happy with the development of that muscle or I just don't think I'm adding
a lot to that muscle anymore.
And so I'll put that muscle or an exercise for that region or whatever, let's say red firm, I might
put that on an AB.
So I'll do one set of legs essentially every second workout, but these other muscles that I'm still
progressing or these other muscles that are higher priority or whatever, that will be a a, A for me.
I might do three sets of or three different exercises for chest, a single set of age.
And I'll do that all the time.
And I think that's a really viable routine.
And it's not, I don't know what you'd call that, but for example, he might have a lifter who, you
know, their upper bodies are higher priority, lower bodies not.
And so upper body might be a, a, A and lower my body might be AB.
And then you just alternate that.
And I think for for advanced lifters, that can be a really viable routine as well.
And it allows you more, you know, mental space for your high priority muscles are being trained each
session.
Totally.
Yeah, totally.
So I think really this this is a great way to help people understand that in contrast to the way
that training splits are presented online or have historically in the last couple of years at least,
been presented online, has been like the most interesting question anyone could possibly ask.
The reality is we don't start with the training split.
And in fact the training split is somewhat malleable.
You start with your exercise selection.
Yeah, that is where you start.
Nothing else makes any sense.
You start by writing down the exercises that you want to do in your programme for the reasons that
are important to you.
So you identify the muscle roots that you want to develop and find, as you put it earlier, high
priority, medium priority, low priority.
And then you start constructing a kind of set of exercises that meet those goals.
So, you know, you've got your, I mean, I did a table about kind of a year or 18 months ago where
it's still this starting point for, you know, kind of different regions of, of, of the muscle and
use these exercises.
And you know, you just pick your exercises and then say, OK, well, does it make sense to program
this as full body A?
Does it make sense to program it for what the AB, AB, which of these two looks more like my kind of
workout plan?
And that really is the starting point.
And then again, you could go even within those high, medium and low priority, is there stuff that I
would be quite happy just doing kind of every other session?
Because it just doesn't really bother me if it grows very much.
OK, Well, then even in the context of a full body A, a, A program, you actually now have an element
of it which is actually full body A/B, A/B, A/B.
And then if there's two exercises like that, then you just alternate them.
And you, you actually now free up a little bit of energy for the other stuff that you want to focus
on.
So I think you could have, as you've described, full body A, A, A programs and full body A/B, A/B,
A/B programs.
But you could also have something that is in the middle, which is a full body A program with a
couple of exercises that are running full body AB, A/B, A/B.
I mean, there's a whole spectrum, a whole continuum of how different that AB routine can look.
And you can have, you know, right at the end of that spectrum, it can be no exercise is repeated and
it might be entirely different like exercises.
Most of your groups, I mean, you, you can literally, yeah.
I mean, within the context of A/B, A/B, A/B, you can go from like, Oh yeah, today I'm doing narrow
bit row and you know, kind of Wednesday I'm going to do wide grip pull down and they're training
different the lap, but both of them are basically training kind of, you know, other pulling muscles
at the same time.
And there's a little bit of overlap on the lap, but not very much.
Conversely, you could literally say, well, I'm doing laps on Monday, but I'm not doing that some
Wednesday.
I'm going to do, you know, something completely different and that would be OK.
I mean, I wouldn't personally want to do that, but you could.
Yeah.
I mean, effectively that kind of then looks like an upper lower, but it's done with the 1 1/2 times
per week frequency.
Yeah.
So yeah, you can have essentially no overlap of a muscle.
You can have overlap of a muscle, but very little overlap of muscle regions.
And then you can have overlap of muscle and muscle regions and assist the exercise itself, which is
different.
And then you can even have some exercises repeated and some exercises that follow one of those
other.
And ultimate ultimately, that's the beauty of of, of, of working with these two training splits.
They're actually incredibly kind of interchangeable in in in so many ways.
You're literally just starting with your excise selection and you're just dragging and dropping into
whatever kind of part of the week they want them to go.
It's really, really easy once you start with the excise selection and then just start portioning
them.
If you try and start with training split, you're going to limit yourself massively, I think.
I think historically that's what people have done.
They've gone, I want to do this split because they believe that somehow the split has some kind of
magical property.
And most of the time it has negative magical properties.
It's actually creating problems for you because if it's not one of these two splits, then it's
probably not going to really work that well.
You know, Whereas if you start with exercise selection, then really you're just using these two
splits as tools to apportion these exercises across your training week.
So in terms of again, selecting A, a, A or AB alternating, what I would say about AB is it gives you
so much flexibility like we've just talked about there.
There's so many different configurations for that.
And if you're someone who like maybe you even need flexibility within the week or within like, you
know, one week I might have more time than I have other weeks or whatever.
And AB, I think just gives you so much opportunity to, to modify routines to work for, you know,
whatever your requirements are, A, a, a, there's, there's no flexibility in that.
You know, it's obviously the same thing.
Well, wait a moment.
No, because I think there's one little bit of flexibility where a, a, a is supreme.
And that is if you've got a routine, a work routine, that can really kind of sort of 'cause you
problems and sometimes you drop down to two times a week.
You miss then.
You miss a session then actually for body, AA is fantastic because you just switch your brain off
about it.
So if you've got a really, really busy life and most of the time you can get to the gym three times
a week, but sometimes you can get that twice a week and that happens regularly, like at least once
twice a month.
Then I would say honestly just do for what it A and then just don't sweat it if you miss a session
because honestly twice a week is great.
Yeah, absolutely.
That's what if I've got a client and I say my question always when I have a new client is how many
times do you think you're going to be able to get to the gym?
And if they tell me I'm going to aim for three times a week, immediately I say, OK, we're going to
do a A because if you're saying you're aiming, I'm not expecting you to be perfect.
I know that aiming for means it's going to be many weeks that are going to be twice a week.
And that's really the only option.
It's going to work very well for us.
It's going to be a A.
So what I would say, the language I would use, there would be a A.
A is the most forgiving split you can do because as you've just said there, even if if you do it
once every four or five days, it's still going to work.
It is so hard to stuff up an AAA A/B I think has the most flexibility or, or, or malleability or
whatever in terms of the potential, like it has so much potential to add in kind of whatever you
might ever want.
And so I think those, if you have someone who where they want to end up is more aspirational, I
think AB is probably the answer because it's just going to it's, it's endless possible progression.
A, A, A has a lower ceiling, unless you're one of those people who's you know what, I can perform
bloody amazingly, my motivation's super high and I can do 25 exercises and work out of which there's
certainly people who can do that.
Then OK, maybe that's going to give you similar kind of runaway that AB will, but for most people
that's not going to be the case.
Yeah.
I mean, the, the only weirdness is that, as I said, there's, there's, there's that capacity with AB
that if you as you get older and you really start dropping off what you can get done in a single
exercise session, AB comes to rescue you there as.
Well, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.
OK.
You can kind of then do even less.
Fall back for when a, a, a is even.
So The thing is, it's, it's just a little bit messier, isn't it?
So like there's, there's, there's these, these, these little areas where each of them has its own
benefit.
But as I say, if we just start with exercise selection and then just kind of say, well, we've got
these two tools available to us.
And then just walk through what it means to do it one way or what it means to do it a different way.
Then I think we can find out what works best for us in our particular point in time and what, what,
what we want to achieve.
And as you say, even in the middle there's a like a crossover option where we little bit of either,
yeah, just starting with excise selection, then just applying it into each of the two templates.
I think is relatively quickly going to reveal to some which one are they going to lean in the
direction of.
And both of them are going to be absolutely fine.
You know, if not, you know.
Ideal for most people most of the time.
I will say my experience with clients is if they're willing to a, a AI tend to see quicker
progression on that.
And in fact, I even get clients even within my training groups, I'll get people sometimes to be
like, I don't like you, you've done an AB.
Can we please go back to a, a, a next phase?
Because I just progressed so quickly on it.
And that tends to be more intermediate clients.
I would say like I do think advanced, it's not going to be the same.
I think it's also worth noting in that context that if you are someone who travels a lot and you
want to, when I don't mean travels a lot in the sense that you're bouncing from one city to the next
every day.
I mean someone who goes to a a place and stays there for a couple of months and then goes to a new
place and stays there for a few months and there's moving around in that way.
So they basically go to a new gym every kind of two or three months.
In that scenario, I think for what a, a, a, A makes a lot of sense because you want to get through
your coordination curve really fast with whatever new machines you're working with.
And then you want to kind of push through and get the whole load of quality workouts done with, with
the exercises that you've now kind of really got comfortable with.
I don't think full body AB works.
So, so I kind of have a gym that I go back to for long periods of time, six months at a time.
And when I'm, I tend to naturally drop into full body AB when I'm there every time I'm away from
that gym.
And in other countries and other gyms, I tend to do the opposite.
And I tend to end up doing the same kind of exercises every single time I go to the gym.
And I don't think that's coincidental.
I think that is me reacting to the fact that when I'm trying to get familiar with an exercise
quickly as I can, I don't want to be doing it every other session.
I want to be doing every time.
Yeah.
That was going to be my question for you.
Is you personally towards one or the other?
And I guess you just answered that.
I don't, I genuinely, I'm very happy with either.
But it, it really does turn and I think if even if you don't do this, like logically, you just do it
emotionally.
Like when I'm, when I'm in the gym that I'm most familiar with, I've kind of spent the last four
years at least six to nine months of the year in, I know exactly what my numbers are on exactly
every single machine.
I know exactly where I get stuck and I know exactly where I really have to start fighting.
And so I'll go back to that gym when I go back to that town or city rather.
And, and I'll have my notes on my app, on my note app on my phone and I'll look to see what numbers
I was doing when I, you know, the Max numbers attack because I always, what I do when I write my
notes for my numbers, I'll have my training weight, what I'm using.
And then I'll have in brackets my maximum weight I've used on my machine reps and sets my and so I
know when I get to that maximum number, I know that's pretty much where I'm going to get stuck, at
least at my age anyway.
So, and so I'll kind of end up when I kind of when I get back, I'll start hammering away at my
machines that I are most important to me.
And I'll get up to those numbers and then I'll start splitting it out into ABA.
But I can't really do that when I go to a, a place that I'm not so comfortable with the, you know,
kind of the equipment there.
And I'll just have to do what I can do.
And then I'll tend to just kind of hammer away at the same machine and see how far I can get.
So I think naturally I tend to to just kind of match both logically how I'm approaching the problem
and also just emotionally how I feel about because nobody likes going to use a machine and just get
stuck at the same number of reps and same number of, you know, kind of in the same way everything
and just can't get past it now, you know, But when you kind of get around 50 years old, it starts to
become a.
Have to get.
Used to the AB and then when I get, yeah, I tend to drift back into and I don't think it's
necessarily always logical.
I think it's partly emotional because you're like, I just don't want to hit that machine every
single time and just hit that same number.
And, you know, I want to just kind of give myself a bit of breathing space and do different things.
Yeah, Yeah.
I mean, and that's sort of this similar mentality is if someone feels like they've kind of got to a
point where they're not going to see much more growth on that muscle, it's kind of the same thing
you're saying.
So I guess the, the kind of take away there was start by writing out all the exercises you need for
your goals, depending on which muscles you want to develop and which ones are high priority, lower
priority, etcetera.
And then decide how many sets do you think you can really do, you can perform well in a single
workout and is that more or fewer than the total number of exercises you want to be doing?
And if it's more than the total number of exercises you want to be doing, then a, a, A is probably
the best solution for you.
And if it's fewer than the total number of exercises you want to be doing, then you get the option
of AB.
And that can look different ways.
It can look like AB life where you're kind of repeating some stuff and alternating other stuff.
Or it can be complete 2 totally different workouts that you're alternating and also understanding
that that might change over time.
And maybe one for a period of time, he might say, you know what, I'm not very busy.
I've got lots of ample spare time.
My motivation is super high.
Maybe I can do 20 sets or I can do 18 sets and 18 different exercises in a workout.
And maybe the other point is super busy and you can only do 10 and then you take your AAA and you
turn it into an AB.
So that's, you know, there's flexibility at different times of your life.
Like you've been saying that, you know, that might be on a macro scale as you get older, it might be
on a, you know, smaller scalars, you've got more social commitments or whatever.
But realistically, I think both of those, A, A, A and AB are probably going to be utilized by the
same person at different points in the year or their life.
Totally, absolutely.
And they're both great.
And, you know, I think a lot of people sort of hear about them and go, oh, which one should I
choose?
Which one's right for me?
And I'm like, well, they could both be right for you at different points in your training year or,
you know, over your lifespan or whatever it is that you're thinking about.
So just get comfortable using both of them.
I would say, you know, if, if, if, if you're listening to this and you, I doubt you're listening to
this and you've kind of been coming from a body part split background.
But you know, maybe, maybe there are people who kind of have been listening to this for only a few
weeks now.
And they've been doing upper, lower or kind of maybe even body part splits for most of their
training career.
And they're thinking about which one of these to, to sort of start with.
And they would don't, don't overthink it.
Just pick one and run it for a couple of months and then try the other one because you will want to
be comfortable with both of these tools.
So I wouldn't see it as an either or decision that you have to get really agitated about right now.
It's like you will want to be comfortable using both of these routines.
At some point in your life you will need them.
So run them both, run one for a month or two and run the other one and then just see which one works
best for you right now and then get a feel for when the other one might be useful.
So I think again, not thinking about this as a battle of the splits and thinking about this as like,
you know, these are two necessary tools in your toolbox.
You want to be able to run both of them and you want to know how they both feel and you want to know
when 1 will feel better for you than the other.
So if you haven't done either of them, pick one and start with and then do the other one.
Flip a coin if you have to.
It doesn't matter really, unless you're a competitive bodybuilder, in which case you might want to
ask some help.
But you know, ultimately I think that's probably the best way of looking at it that you will want to
master both of them.
I think that's probably the way to think about.
It yeah, yeah.
So so that's that's how I answer the end is they're both good.
Use them both.
So if you can't.
Even though they're both good, but they're actually both, I would say necessary skills to have.
I would, I would get to the point where you're comfortable with both of them.
I think that is a, a key skill set to have in your routine because as I say, there's going to be
times where I mean, imagine you, you, you, you, you're dialled in, you're doing a, B, A/B, A/B, but
then suddenly huge work project comes up and you know you're only going to be able to get to the gym
twice a week.
So you, if you, if you're not comfortable running like a A programs, you are now going to be
sweating about this because you're going to need to construct it like so no, you don't want to be in
that situation.
You want to have that flexibility of running both.
You know, in the same way you could have been running a great for the A, A, a program and then
suddenly your gym session times shrink and you've only got 45 minutes.
So you now you, you now need to run A, B, A/B, A/B because you can only get to the gym 45 minutes
three times a week.
OK.
So I actually think it's really like A almost like they come into a life skill to be able to program
in both of these ways.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Necessary tools, yeah.
You're going to limit yourself if you don't understand how to use these.
And certainly if you want to be able to program for clients, then those parameters, the clients are
going to tell you I've only got 45 minutes or the clients going to tell you I can only get to them
twice a week.
Immediately you need both of these programming tools.
Yeah, yeah.
And some of those adjustments are really micro adjustments.
You know, I find with my clients that there might be like a 10 minute change where they're like, you
know what, I did have an hour now because I need to travel further for work or whatever.
Now I've got 50 minutes.
And it might be that that a a, A has turned into an AB, but it's, again, it's one of those
intermediate ABS where it's mostly a a, A and you might just need to make one or two little
adjustments to make that work.
So yeah, I think that's, that's an interesting observation that we're not talking necessarily
overhauling an entire program.
Sometimes it can just be leaning into one or One Direction or the other and just knowing.
And that can be difficult if you're going from AB to a, a, a because you're actually reducing
exercise selection in in that example there.
And so then that becomes a bio mechanics kind of question.
How do I, how do I lose as little as possible when I actually go backwards in the total number of
exercises I'm doing?
And that would be an interesting conversation for another day, potentially.
But I think where we've landed here is, is both and necessary tools.
Learn to use them both as a starting point.
Start by writing down how many exercises you're going to do that will help determine where you
begin.
And then you've got both tools in your back pocket when you need them.
OK, thank you guys for listening to an hour and a half episode on AAAB and arriving by telling you
to do both.
Hopefully there's some tools and some tips in there to make these workout splits work even better
and more effectively for you.
We'll be back next week with another topic.