Episode: 047 How to write the perfect program
URL: https://open.spotify.com/episode/7EuOZuvtanmE9QVtGQNABT
Published: 2026-04-13
================================================================================

Welcome back.
Thank you for joining us for another episode of Hypertrophy past and present.
Chris, how are you doing today?
Yeah, I'm doing well.
Thanks, Jake.
Good, good, good.
And we have a new episode, we have a new topic, and I have a new plan for you all.
Now let's jump into it.
This is a plan from Arthur Jones.
I've had so many questions about Arthur Jones.
Arthur Jones, Mike Mensah, these guys are just constantly talked about.
And I'm gonna give you guys an Arthur Jones plan, but it's not the one that you guys are expecting.
So Arthur Jones, for those of you who don't know, founded Nautilus.
So Nautilus gym equipment, which obviously a lot of people still use today.
And he's particularly well known for being involved in what was called the Colorado Experiment.
Now, I'm not gonna talk about what that was.
If you don't know what that was, I am gonna talk about it in another episode because it is quite
interesting.
But today I actually wanna give you guys a plan of Arthur Jones, which was I guess you could call it
a silver era plan.
So he talked about this plan in the 19 in 1970.
I think he wrote a book or a magazine about in 1970, but he said he was using this plan 20 plus
years ago.
So we're talking forties 1950, so well and truly before anabolics.
Now, Arthur Jones, for you guys who've not looked much into him, he does have some pretty
interesting stuff to step to say.
His ideas did evolve over time, obviously, as he was sort of heavily using machines that I guess
brought with it some particular rhetoric as well.
But I do think he's an interesting cat and I think he's one who's worth looking into some of the
stuff that he did share.
And in fact, Chris, I've been told you some of this, but like there was this really interesting
thing in his book, which I'm getting sidetracked here, but I was astounded when I saw it because
this is stuff that's talked about over half a century ago.
And he was saying that from a warming up perspective, if your goal was maximum performance.
So he's like, if you're a weight lifter and you're doing singles or you're doing Max load on the
bar, then obviously you're going to do lots of warm up sets to get to that Max effort, right?
But he says from a bodybuilding perspective, the goal is different.
And he says people make a mistake of thinking that they need to be performing the best when they're
doing the bodybuilding work.
And he goes, you're not going to perform as well not doing these warm up sets, but you're going to
get more stimulus because you're not going to be fatigued.
So he's basically explained post activation potentiation and fatigue and then said that actually the
post activation potentiation doesn't really seem to affect hypertrophy stimulus, just performance.
Yeah, we don't really know.
I mean, I think you could make a case that it does, and I think you can make a case that it doesn't.
I mean it really just comes down to what whether or not the additional mechanical tension that the
because just to be clear, the actual post activation potentiation effect, the PAP effect, not the
Pape effect, which is slightly different, but the PAP effect definitely does increase single fiber
mechanical tension.
The question is, does it do that in a way that is either, you know, kind of greater over the course
of the whole set and that's kind of debatable or secondly, does it do it in a way is meaningful
enough to make a difference for hypertrophy stimulus?
And again, that's probably pretty debatable.
So I mean, ultimately, I think the PAP effect, you can make a case for it having a benefit, but then
equally is absolutely right that if you, you know, kind of add too many repetitions in your warm up
sets, you are going to end up in a, in a fatigue state.
And that's going to have the opposite effect, especially if it's creating Gaussian related fatigue
mechanisms that reduce mechanical tension.
So I mean, we've talked about using warm ups in a different way of doing like, well, not reps rather
than what stats.
And I think if you have that mindset shift, you can start to get the PAP, the PAP effect, the post
activation potentiation effect without that negative kind of fatigue problem.
So I think you can thread the needle a little bit here.
So I don't fundamentally accept his explanation as being like all-encompassing.
I think you can kind of work around the fatigue problem to agree.
But equally, I accept the fact that it's certainly not a slam dunk whether or not, you know, the pan
effect does contribute to a hypertrophy stimulus increase.
So on balance, you know, for time saving and for getting more exercises in, which is certainly, you
know what the programme that you've sent me you're going to talk about includes a whole bunch of
exercises.
So in order to get those exercises in, I think it makes sense to, you know, not work towards that
goal of maximizing the excise performance in the same way.
But I'm just slightly less kind of dogmatic about I think that he's probably overstating the case.
Well, I don't know these dogmatic, I don't know that he always recommended like not doing any warm
up sets at all.
I it just the way he was talking about it was, hey, these are going to be far more important from
performance standpoint and far less important potentially from a hypertry standpoint.
But yeah, I mean it's.
More important, just to make the space to do the exercise.
Yeah, yeah.
But my mobile arching point here is it's interesting how often you'll go back and look at stuff
written fifty, 60-70 years ago and be like, Oh my God, they're explaining this physiological
principle that, you know, we've only sort of understood for the last few years properly, and these
guys seem to intuit it half a century ago.
I totally agree.
I mean, I think high poetry, science especially has been in, you know, kind of really bad place for
at least the last 30 or 40 years.
I mean, I mean, it's been in a terrible place.
There's been some amazing work been done, but the overarching kind of frameworks that people have
been using are just complete nonsense.
I mean, at least since 19, early 1990s, if not before.
I mean, we've been just, you know, kind of wandering around talking about absolute nonsense for so
many years.
And it's literally always because people just refuse to read basic Physiology.
And they make stuff up.
They make stuff up.
They go, hey, look, metabolic stress is a thing.
I'm like, there's no physiological reason to suppose that at all.
And they devote decades to pursuing an idea that's just completely nonsense.
And I don't know why, but that's just how how it's become so.
But yeah, you're absolutely right.
I mean, go back, you know, sort of 50, sixty, 7080 years and you'll find people intuiting more or
less what we are talking about today physiologically.
And after explaining it in funny terminology like you look at what they're saying, I don't think
that's exactly what's happening, but the point to something underlying physiologically that's true.
Pretty much, yeah.
So let's stop teasing you guys.
This is the plan.
So we start off with two sets of 10 of full squats.
He was big on full ROM squats, the hamstring, getting down to the calf.
And then we've got three sets of 20 single leg calf raises.
Then we've got 2 sets of 10 standing barbell overhead press, 2 sets of 10 behind the neck pull ups,
2 sets of 10 flat bench, two sets of 10 standard grip chin up, so probably more sagittal plane.
And then we've got 2 sets of 10 parallel dips, 2 sets of 10 barbell curls, 2 sets of 12, what they
called a triceps curl.
He did this with a pulley machine.
So the triceps curl was usually more like a what we would call a skull crusher type exercise.
And then we've got 2 sets of 15 wrist curls, one set of 10 regularly grip chin UPS again.
So we've come back to the chin UPS, one set of 10 parallel dips again.
So the second time we got dips, 2 sets of 15 stiff leg deadlifts and then concluding with two sets
of 10 dumbbell lateral razors.
So this is an interesting program in that they've got these, the exercises repeating out of order.
That was a theme for a little while.
They're sort of like AI want to say like maybe a 10 year period where that was happening sort of in
their 40s, maybe early 50s after they'd started the set system.
Obviously prior to that point, people were just using single sets and then they started actually
doing multiple sets but splitting up the exercise.
So they would usually do, you know, one set of whatever overhead press and they do the other work,
come back, do another set of overhead press.
So here he's actually got the multiple sets and he's repeating a couple of exercises.
So that to me would ass, you know, I would assume he's probably doing this, you know, late 40s,
early 50s after sets had been made popular.
And obviously he's doing this before Nautilus equipment.
So there's a a pulley on here and that's it as far as, you know, machines or equipment goes.
And obviously his later plans did look quite different when he was using machines.
So 14, well, 14 series, but I guess there's I think 12 different exercises because he's repeated a
couple of them.
What do you think of this plan?
Yeah.
So is this being done 2 * a week?
3 * a.
Week 3 * a week.
Three times a week.
OK, cool.
So broadly speaking, he's well within recoverable volumes here even when he's doing well, I guess.
Yeah, I mean in terms of the pull ups, if we assume that the behind the neck pull ups are kind of
pretty wide grip, then obviously that's going to be a slightly different thing to the more regular
kind of grip chin UPS which are going to be more sizeable plane.
So you know, with that kind of being taken into account, assuming that that's then different
exercise sizes, he is pretty much within recoverable volumes because he's either doing 2 sets of 10
or he's doing three sets of 10 if you count the one set of extra chin UPS that he does towards the
end and the one set of extra dips he does towards the end.
So broadly speaking, he's within recoverable volumes, which is cool.
Again, three times a week.
So this is a very classic kind of sort of starting template for the silver area that we talked about
before, exactly what we would talk about today physiologically in terms of excise selection.
Obviously in terms of lower body, we've got squats, we've got calf raisers and we've got stiff leg
deadlifts.
That's all we've got.
I think for the lower body, not actually a bad starting point.
I mean he's he's got pretty amazing, amazing coverage with those three.
I mean, he obviously got Doctor Magnus bit of glute, he's got quads, he's got hamstrings and he's
got the carve raises.
I guess he's got gastric in there.
So I mean, ultimately, yeah, very, very solid.
I mean, obviously no hip thrust or anything like that group bit, but you know, pretty, pretty solid
kind of low body coverage.
I mean, without machines it'd be hard to make that a lot better.
It would, I mean, yeah, it would just literally be a glute bridge that you would have to kind of do
to really make that better in terms of the upper body.
Then obviously I'm happy because he's got both.
Oh, this is this plan was made for you.
Well, I would do single sets, but yeah, I mean, it's definitely my Caterpillar so but yeah, so he's
got he's got wide grip sort of pull ups.
He's got narrow grip pull ups.
So he's got both regions of a lat in terms of pressing stuff, he's got flat bench and he's got
overhead press.
Again, pretty good coverage in terms of arms.
He's got one, only one biceps exercise, but it's a kind of generic 1:00 somewhere in the middle for
everything.
And he's got dips, which obviously is, you know, kind of slightly contentious what it's actually
doing, but OK.
And then he's got a triceps extension as well.
So pretty solid coverage.
I would say slightly too much triceps volume actually on balance.
And then he's got a little extra kind of middle delt.
So maybe that barbell overhead press is not completely in the frontal plane.
It might be a kind of a bit of a sculpted plane kind of press.
But OK, fine, no traps really.
So that would probably be the thing that's obviously missing that he could have done there not
wouldn't have been that difficult to back off a little bit on the volume of some of those other
things that he's pushing a bit too far and do and do a shrug.
Yeah, I mean, I guess like he's probably relying a bit there on the stiff leg deadlift.
Like he's not because he doesn't even have a benefit row.
You know, usually these plans will have a benefit row.
You're going to get some trap at least.
Yeah, yeah.
So really, yeah, I mean, it's just the machine kind of knee extension that we're missing.
And yeah, I mean, that would be the yeah, that would kind of get you towards a sort of bare minimum
bodybuilding style program program, I think.
But that's really, really good.
I mean, I don't like the kind of silliness towards the end where he's going back and doing an extra
set of the exercises he's already done.
Well, especially because he's doing 2 sets earlier, you know, I can understand if you were doing
single sets, but if, you know, if it's a little bit more like a circuit and you're going from one
exercise, doing one set, going to the net, like that's motivating.
I often do train like that myself.
I enjoy it.
Bit to do 2 sets.
What are you getting out of it?
Unless you've seen that first set, a little bit of warm up, Yeah, it's not.
Really, it doesn't really make any sense.
So you could just take those out and again, I would strip it back to single sets and you'd have, you
know, sort of 12 exercises plus you'd probably want to put like a knee extension in and maybe hit
thrust and you'd be back to 14 and that would.
Be trap exercise.
Oh, yes, of course.
Yeah, you would, yeah.
Yes, we'd be at 15 exercises.
We'd have everything pretty nicely covered, including, you know, a couple of.
You could take the difference out there given that you've got you could, yeah, you could take the
difference out.
I mean, I mean like there's, there's a couple of things you could do that, but you basically as a
starting point, it's really, really, really good.
It's really good.
I mean, what I like about it is, like you said, the volumes are going on, you know, in terms of
what's recoverable, Like this is exactly what we would expect.
And we're talking what's is 252027 sets, I think in total, which you know, obviously is quite a lot
like a lot of people would say, you know, they're doing half that.
But I think, yeah, there's no reason you can't, you know, I'm not saying people need to, but there's
no reason you can't potentially do.
There are a bunch of reasons why you might not want.
To.
Yeah, exactly.
Yeah.
But yeah, I know.
I mean, it's just like, you know, sometimes I kind of look at this podcast project that we do and I
think how many times can we like show people this information?
I mean, how many times can we just kind of go back and say, hey, look, you know, before Anabolics
arrived, people were doing, you know, exactly the same strength training that physiologically makes
sense and what we talked.
About it just fits perfectly.
Exactly the same thing.
It's like if you can't see the fact that anabolics have completely ruined all strength training
knowledge, you are completely missing the point here.
I mean, it's just so overwhelmingly obvious.
Well, you know what, actually, I posted this, this quote that Arthur Jones mentioned and he said
that he was talking to a a bodybuilder at a, a 1970s London show and the he was the bodybuilder is
being interviewed and the interviewer asked him, what protein do you use?
Which protein supplement do you use?
And the bodybuilder applied?
Why do I need a protein supplement?
Have you not heard of Dynabol?
Yeah, absolutely bad.
You know, I think sometimes, yeah, they're kind of the curtain slips and you kind of see what's
what's behind it.
But yeah, no, I mean, what I guess makes me aggravated is that the hypertrophy researchers to an
extent have bought into that.
Nonsense, you.
Know, So when they talk about strength training programs, their brains are referencing bodybuilding
programs in the 80s, nineties and 2000s.
And I'm like, guys, if you think that is normal strength train, you are absolutely, you know, kind
of away with the fairies.
I mean, it's just nonsense.
You know, that is not what what is going on here.
But no, I think it's really cool.
We just keep seeing these examples of how, you know, even names that you wouldn't necessarily
associate with the kind of routines that we talk about are actually pretty much bang on.
Yeah, now.
Very cool.
Very cool.
Yeah, yeah.
And with no equipment, you know, this is a really solid plan, which is kind of where we want to go
with the second-half of this podcast is we want to talk about for different goals, what would a
different plan look like at what point?
You know, obviously this is a body composition bodybuilding focus plan.
And we want to talk about what on that continuum of bodybuilding plans.
And we've talked a little bit about this in the past.
We've got maximalist style plans, which are really aiming to train everything possible and get, you
know, the highest ceiling of potential growth possible.
And then we've got more minimalist style plans, which is still looking at, well, developing kind of
every muscle, but not trying to necessarily maximize one's gains.
And then there's some other plans that might fall maybe in between those or even potentially have,
you know, less of a bodybuilding focus.
And I guess we want to talk about, well, what are those differing categories and what would it look
like for one to structure or construct a plan that would satisfy those different needs?
Yeah, exactly.
I mean, we had an absolutely humbling argument before we got on the podcast today because we're
trying to establish what the what the criteria would be for each category now, where I where I got
to and I think I managed to beat Jake down to agree with it eventually, but we're.
Yelling and it was cussing and it was very heated.
Maybe not quite that bad, but yeah, basically where I kind of started was that we've already done an
entire podcast about what a like bare minimum strength training program would look like to get you
maximum kind of sort of coverage with the minimum amount of effort.
So the kind of thing that you could like do if you were literally right up against it for time, you
know, you obviously this is not a bodybuilding competitive kind of competition style training
program.
It's literally just like, you know, somebody wanted to do a couple of exercises and get the maximum
benefit from it.
So you could call it an old person program.
It's certainly sort of the style of training that I'm very attracted to from time to time.
But basically we've done a podcast on that already, so I'll cover that off relatively quickly.
But yeah, it's the absolute bare minimum strength training, but not bodybuilding competitive.
The next category up will then be like a minimalist bodybuilding competitive program.
So it'll be like, what could you actually do?
And at least get some degree of growth in all the kind of regions of the body.
It's not, again, not missing anything.
So like this is kind of one of the areas we argued about.
It's like, can you actually sort of miss something?
I might know.
I don't think you can do that.
So you have to have a, you have to have a rectus femoral exercise.
You know, you have to have a gastroc exercise.
You can't just say, well, I'm trilling necessarily as therefore the calves are covered.
I'm like, no, no, no, that doesn't count.
We've got to actually have something for everything, even if it's not perfect.
So they, the, the, the program that we were just looking at had a biceps curl in it.
So it had a standing barbell curl.
So you are going to get all the elbow flexor kind of being used in that, but they're absolutely not
going to get maxed out, but you are at least covering all of them.
So that would be kind of a perfect example of an exercise that would fit into this kind of program
where you're calling it a body.
Building minimalist, but it's not going to Max anything out.
I think a lot of fitness influencers at the moment are promoting programs in this category.
You know, I think they're going, these are the kind of people who are saying, Oh no, no, no.
If you're, if you're training a muscle with an X size, all the muscle fibers are getting trained.
I mean like categorically nonsense.
And we can show it in a number of different ways and we've talked about that before.
But the point is that that that is kind of where they are fitting.
They're fitting into a a minimalist bodybuilding standard program where everything is getting
trained just not very well.
And then maximalist would then be like, OK, what can we do to actually try and get some growth in
muscle fibers that are not quite getting activated in the other kind of scenarios because they are
not being preferentially targeted by the civic exercise.
So for me, I think there are three really obvious categories.
Now, when we were talking about this before the podcast, Jake was drawing my attention to the fact
that a lot of people actually will potentially not recognise those kind of three locations as being
attractive to them.
So like as A and we were kind of going through it because I was going like, yeah.
But as a systems thinker, these for me are the kind of clearly defined segments.
They're like that you can really be very clear about what goes into these three areas.
And you were like, yeah.
But from a practical perspective, they're not going to be.
Interested.
Like people don't care.
That's not what people are asking.
And I'm like, fine, but start with where I'm starting from and then kind of go from there because at
least you have a very clear starting point.
And I think that's kind of where our disagreement was.
It was because there's a difference between systems and and actual practicalities.
And ironically, when you did say that, I realised, oh, that's actually how I answered my question
today when someone asked me this exact.
Question how you answered the question?
Yeah.
Because you need a starting point, you have to have something that's clearly defined as your
starting point.
Yeah.
So we're going to give you guys some examples of those.
So, so we're going to stick to those categories that you've identified.
Afterwards we can.
Blur these edges a little bit and explain.
Yeah, exactly.
Right.
So the first ones are easy to knock off, like you said.
We've talked about this before.
Yeah.
Yeah.
This would be the kind of plan if my mum came to me and she was like, hey, I just want to, like,
maintain a little bit of muscle mass while I'm aging.
You know, I don't want to look like, I don't even care if I look like a lift, Like I just want to
maintain a bit of muscle.
This would be the real basic plan that one could do, right?
So we're talking training each major muscle group.
But really, that's it.
We're not trying.
This is not an aesthetic plan.
Yeah.
So realistically, we're talking maybe, what, 2 upper body exercises, 2 lower body exercises, 4
exercise in total.
Do it two or three times a week.
Right.
Totally.
Yeah.
So I mean we've we've talked about this before, but I mean like where we got to last time was that
we would probably have some kind of incline press and some kind of some kind of pull down probably
and then probably a leg press and a seated leg go.
Now I think if you if you wanted to push that a little bit further and you didn't have the old
person limitation, then you could do kind of a stiff leg then lift and a squat.
And you'd probably get slightly better benefits in terms of the purpose of the program, which is to
get as much coverage as possible.
Because you would get some supporting muscle growth from the squat and you get some erectors and
stuff like that from your stiff leg.
And it would be just a little bit kind of more holistic if you like.
So it will give you a lot across a very, very large number of muscles, nothing really being maxed
out, but you'll get a really, really solid coverage.
So I really, really like that way of training.
I think that's got enormous mileage.
I think a huge number of people on the planet could benefit massively from that kind of program, but
it's not a bodybuilding competitive pro.
And, you know, I made a comment that, like, you may not even look like you lift.
I mean, to be fair, you will just doing that.
You will look like you lift.
Yeah.
But you know, it's obviously not going to, you know, you, you might look at someone's arms and, and
maybe you won't necessarily, depending on a person notice a huge amount of growth or you know,
calves or whatever.
I just want to clarify there.
So you've given an example.
You could do a leg curl, you could do a leg press.
If you didn't have machines, then you could do a, a stiff leg deadlift or even a Romanian bed lift.
You could do a squat.
And then for upper body, if you have machines, you could either do a lap pull down and you could do
a, a chest press machine or you could do an overhead machine.
Or if you didn't have machines, you could do an incline barbell press, you could do an overhead
barbell press, you could do a flat bench.
Any of those would theoretically work.
If I was fine tuning it for my females, I would usually give them an overhead press there.
From the males, I'd usually give them a bench.
Easy done.
I don't think we need to say much more about that.
You could do single sets.
You could do 2.
Sets you could you could swap out.
You could swap out the leg press for a for a head thrust if you really wanted to, if you wanted to
go down the kind of female specific route or if even if you just wanted to do a exercise, it was
slightly kind of more comfortable.
I mean, I think there's, there's options there definitely.
Yeah, yeah, easy.
And like I said, single sets, 2 sets, we could do three sets, it doesn't particularly matter.
You could do.
Three times a week, 2 * a week doesn't matter.
Absolutely.
There's a lot of variation there, but we've done that before, so yeah, moving on.
So now we've got our we've got our minimalist bodybuilding.
Bodybuilding programme, yeah.
So you have to actually, you have to at least activate some fibres in each of the relevant muscles.
That's my criteria, our criterion for this particular kind of category.
Yeah.
So this is so each muscle actually.
So for example, you, you gave the example of the rect fem.
So we're not just saying, oh, as long as there's some quad involved in it, then that's covered.
We're actually saying no because the rect fem obviously is gonna be ex excluded completely.
We need an exercise even for the rect fem, right.
You do?
Yeah.
So if we were to take that that basic plan we just gave a moment ago and then turning that into this
bodybuilding minimalist, you want to go a different approach.
Well, you could do it that way, but the problem is that you're starting with some assumptions that
may not necessarily be valid.
Because The thing is that, let's say for example, you start with the home gym example.
So you start with your kind of way to pull up or pull up or whatever.
You've got maybe some dumbbell pressing in there, maybe it's standing or whatever because you
haven't got a bench.
And then you've got like a sort of a squat on a stiff leg deadlift.
Those aren't necessarily exercises that I would have anywhere near a kind of standard minimalist
bodybuilding competitive program.
Even if you start with the kind of machine versions again, like I'm not necessarily going to have
those exercises, I mean.
OK, so let's just build it from the ground up.
I would actually build it from the ground up.
I mean, I think there is going to be crossover, but I just don't think you would necessarily start
from that same particular point.
And then you just go through the the muscles of the body and say what, what, what, what have we got?
So if you do lower body because it's easier, you know, you've got, you know, you've got glutes,
adductors, hamstrings, quads, calves to worry about really.
So you could, you could say, OK, well I'm going to keep my leg press or squat variation and that's
going to give me some glute and some adductor Magnus and some single joint quad.
Fantastic.
OK, done.
And then you go, OK, well, what else do I need?
Well, I need some hamstrings in there.
So you could have you see the leg curve, which we've already got.
So we have actually got 2 exercises that we've already talked about.
And then you go, OK, well I'm going to need a knee extension.
I can't really do without that.
So you're going to have a knee extension in there and then you're going to have some kind of calf
raise.
So you've ended up adding in a calf raise and A and a knee extension and you've built up from what
that was previously.
But you could do it a different way because you could say, well, instead of having the leg press,
I'm going to get my glute from a hip thrust variation.
And then I'm going to put a knee extension in and that's going to give me solid rect firm.
And then the other single joint quad.
Maybe if I maybe if I did a glute bridge instead of hamstring instead of a hip thrust.
So I'm not really getting very much quad at all.
And then you're actually then going to need to find some adductors from somewhere.
Or you could have an adductor machine instead, you know, so you could do it on that route.
So yeah, they'll decide in a number of different ways.
At that point, it's starting to look a little bit more maximus because you've added in sort of one
or two more exercise than you needed, right?
So I guess.
You're actually, you're definitely better going down this quarter leg press route because that
captures your kind of your glute adductor Magnus and quad really, really quickly.
So you actually get a lot very, very quickly from doing that.
So that's where I think going down the hip thrust route is is is disadvantageous.
But you could have paired your hip thrust with a stiff leg deadlift, which will give you hamstrings
and and adductor Magnus at the same time.
So you have a hip thrust and a stiff leg deadlift and that keeps it pretty, pretty low.
And then you get the high extension.
Size number, and then you just need your knee extension to give you your rect fem and your calf
raise.
So you've actually done that still in a relatively small number of exercises.
So hip thrust, stiff leg, knee extension and calf raise is actually getting you to the same place as
starting with the leg press.
They are getting to the same place and I think one of those is going to be a little bit more, I
guess classic like female physique driven focus and the other one's going to be a little bit more
potentially male focused.
So I'd quite like that as a foundation there for the lower body and and then both would have some
kind of, you know, standing calf raised whatever to get the gastro.
Yeah.
You you can need an extension and calf raised in both because you can't do you can't get around
those two giant muscle problems.
Yep, Yep.
So what's up?
Give us 4 exercises.
I think you're doing that in four in both cases, so stiff leg hip thrust and then obviously the two,
the knee extension and the calf raise.
And then in the other one you've got leg press and seated leg curl and then the extension and calf
raise.
I mean, I think you're getting to the same place more or less, just with an emphasis being whether
you're getting more glute or whether you're getting more kind of, you're getting more, you're
getting.
I actually like that second one better.
You know, that's really interesting.
Hip.
Yeah.
Hip, yeah.
I do like it better because I think that yeah, I do, I do.
I think you're, you're probably losing a little bit on the hamstrings.
I think that's probably what you're losing.
Yeah.
So with the hip or stiff leg, you're getting a little bit less hamstrings because the adoptive
Magnus is kind of getting priority on the stiff leg.
That's where you're losing on that.
That's why I was perceiving that as being better.
It's not.
It's because the hamstrings are losing out.
In the case of the leg press, you're actually getting.
Yeah, you're getting less glute.
OK, understood.
Right.
Yeah.
Cool.
So it's either less glute or less hamstring.
Yes.
That's that's the way it works.
Yeah, yeah.
Now you could with the stiff leg, you could also do reduce strange emotion.
You could do a like a stiff leg rack pull.
Yeah, you could shift the balance back the other way.
Well, you've been losing your doctor, Magnus.
I mean you that that's the problem with the minimalist per program for bodybuilding is that you're
always going to be emphasizing 1.
Direction.
That's it, isn't it?
Yeah, that's the whole point.
That's the whole point exactly.
OK, OK, so we've got 4 exercises so far.
We've got the whole lower body covered, you know, relatively well, yes.
We're not biasing anything and and maximizing anything.
We've got every extra point covered.
Yeah.
Now if we go upper body, where should we start?
Start top down.
So yeah, I mean, basically you've kind of got a, you've kind of got some very, very difficult
decisions to make here really.
I mean, ultimately if you want to get complete chess development, you're going to need a flat bench
for a very slight incline bench and that really is kind of your starting point now.
You are going to get obviously triceps development there.
You are going to get anterior development there, you know so that.
Yeah.
So that would make more sense in using a peg deck because you could use a peg deck, but then you've
lost some of the triceps, you've lost some of the.
Interior delt so you could start there and then you could then add in a lateral raise if you wanted
to.
To get the middle delt then.
To get the middle delt and then you probably have reasonable coverage there.
Now you could do it a different way.
You could do instead overhead press Yeah, and you could add a peg fly.
Yeah, the peg deck exactly right.
Yeah.
So in the same situation.
Yeah, the same thing you saw with the lower body basically.
Yeah, yeah, I am.
Most people I think are going to go with the bench press and add in the lateral raise.
I probably would do the opposite, you know, I but that's just again, it's preferences and what feels
most comfortable.
My preference would actually be the opposite as well.
I think I'd prefer an overhead and then a peg deck.
So, so that, that would probably be kind of two different ways of doing the same thing.
And then in terms of back then, obviously, I, I think you probably do need to pulling exercises.
I think you probably need a wide grip and a narrow grip.
I don't think you can really get around that.
I know that some people disagree.
I just don't think it's possible.
So I think you're going to need a pull down, you're probably going to need an arrogant row and then
and then you're going to need something for traps.
Now, if you're already doing the narrow.
Yeah, you finish that thought.
You're.
Going to do the narrow row, I would just go straight on to a Kelso afterwards.
OK, So you don't think the the sad will play in a row because we're going to get some trap work in
that that fee is not satisfying this?
I don't think it is.
I think that people have made a really, I think, OK, so let me be clear on this.
I think that when fitness influencers are arguing that their rowing variations are training the
traps, I think they have made a case that is so far away from reality that it's caused people to
shift their like baseline point of how something works.
What I'm, what I'm saying here is like, like, I think what you've got is you've got people who are
making the case that their own variations completely train the traps and the traps are completely
maxed out.
And I'm like, that is so far from reality that you've actually kind of you've you've you've you've
treated that as like an exaggeration.
And it's not an exaggeration.
It's hyperbole.
It's off the other end.
It's like so far away from reality, it's not funny.
Like you kind of look at them and go, oh, yeah, OK, well, maybe they're just being a bit
exaggerated.
Maybe it doesn't quite train and all of the traps and this like maybe he's training them and just,
you know, kind of well, but not not kind of I'm like, no, it's not really training them very.
Well, so you're saying it's moved the baseline opinion just a little step closer towards this
hyperbolic statement?
It has and I'm like, no, no, no guys, you're way off the end of the of the of the of the framework
here.
It's not doing that at all.
You need fundamentally traps are not getting trained in the way that you think they are in a rowing
situation.
They're just not, you know, so we need to have a shrugging exercise.
I mean, like anybody who's done Kelso's knows that they can literally just kind of put like the pin
down multiple notches on the machine from what they're rowing at.
They can, you know, and anybody who's done kind of vertical shrugs knows the monstrous amounts of
weight they can move in a vertical shrug compared to, you know, kind of anything else.
It's like you're dealing with something that is not really getting trained very effectively by a
rowing motion.
So I absolutely would have a shrugging now.
I just don't think it's viable to say that they're being trained effectively by rats.
So this is how I program in this situation.
If I'm doing minimalist and I want trap work, what I actually do is if I had say someone who, let's
say a female client and I was like pretty happy to de emphasize traps, but I wanted something I
you're gonna disagree with me, but I would program bend over 1 dumbbell row and that would be my row
of choice.
I feel like no other row is going to come close to getting trap decent trap involvement.
But I feel like just if you do a bend over one arm dumbbell row with like a bit of body English, I
feel like you get a decent bit of trap at the top there.
If I had a guy and I wanted a bit more trap involvement, I would be programming the stiff leg rack
pull.
That'd be talked about for lower body.
And for the first, like for the the set, what I'd do is stiff leg rack pull with a shrug, a very
good shrug at the top of each repetition.
The shrug, isn't it?
I mean, yeah.
And then what I would get them to do is do that one set to failure, put the bar down, adjust the
grip and then continue going doing a stiff leg without the shrug at the top.
You're still programming drugs.
I mean exercise selection point of view, you're still programming drugs.
I mean, it's like that's the point I'm making.
It's like you can't leave it out of a program and expect to get full back development.
It just doesn't work like that.
You know, I think that I think that, again, this is one of those areas where anabolics are causing
issues because, you know, the trapezius probably does grow better in response to anabolic stimulus,
pharmaceutical anabolic stimulus, than other muscles do.
So I think a lot of people just go, well, no, no, these guys are growing, you know, traps without,
you know, kind of doing the shrug exercise.
I'm like, yeah, but, you know, have you asked them what pharmaceuticals they're taking?
So it doesn't matter.
It doesn't matter if you ask him.
We all know what the answer will be.
Yeah, I know I'm being polite, but but yeah, I think genuinely, I think the debate over this
exercise selection debate where people are trying to, as I said at the beginning, fitness
influences, at the moment, they're making, they're trying to make a big case that you'd literally
just need to, you know, have a muscle active in an exercise and somehow it's magically going to
grow.
I mean, no, it's not, you know, not to the extent that you want it to, you know, and I just don't
think the traps are really getting any kind of meaningful stimulus from rows in the way that they're
claiming they do.
OK.
So well, how many exercises are we up to now in the upper body?
So we've got one.
We've got 2 on the pressing side and you've got 3 on the backside, so you're 5 S front and back.
You've got 2 pressing bars and three on the back.
So you've got the two different planes of motion for the laps, and you've got the.
We had the additional one for chest or del so didn't we if we were doing?
Yeah.
So you've got your two.
So you've got your pressing the vertical or horizontal and then you've got your supplemental.
So you're either and then you've got the kind of lateral raises.
And then I'll say on the on the back side of the body, you've then got you've got the three probably
two different planes for the pulling and then the and then the shrug.
And then obviously rear adults are getting covered by your kind of pulling exercises.
So you need to worry about that and then after that it is then obviously arms.
So you've got, as we said already, the a programme that we talked about at the beginning had a very
kind of general biceps exercise.
So standing mid range peak effort point is going to be pretty OK for covering the entire elbow
flexor group.
And then again, you could do a standing push down and get, you know, some long head if you wanted to
kind of sort of do that.
Ultimately, you could pretty much do any single joint trash exercise if you really wanted to.
But I think the standing pushdown is probably the easiest and it probably is the best.
So that would probably be where I would go for that.
So where?
Where does that get us to 1177?
Oh yeah, possible full lower body, yeah.
So 11, yeah.
So you absolutely could do that in a single session.
So you could do full body three times a week and you can do that every single time, yeah.
So the terminology I'm working off here is I would call that if we were to do that with say single
sets, you're doing 11 sets, doing that two or three times a week, I would call that minimalist and
then it's.
Bodybuilding minimalist, isn't it?
So like just to differentiate it from like health or, you know, kind of entry level strength
training kind of minimalist.
Minimalist or bare minimum is kind of how I keep thinking about it, yeah.
Now I would say that it also satisfies the second category that I think people are talking a lot
about at the moment.
And I don't have a name for which I which all some people are calling it.
This is consolidated, right?
So the idea of doing, you know, that one exercise per muscle group by doing multiple sets instead of
spreading those sets out across additional exercises, that would be a consolidated plan.
So so this.
Is the next structure because you don't don't understand how Physiology works?
I'm not arguing about why, I'm arguing about the what.
So, so the I, so this same workout structure of these 11 exercises could be minimalist.
I would say if you're doing one set two or three times a week or could be a consolidated plan if you
were doing each with multi sets and then you're doing your 2233 sets, whatever, two or three times a
week.
That's the language I'm working with.
I think it makes sense for me.
So and then who is that plan good for?
I mean, that plan is really like that plan is good for anyone who wants good results and doesn't
want to be committing to doing 90 minutes in the gym or.
Or it doesn't.
It's a really solid, it's a really solid plan.
So it covers kind of a multitude of bases.
It covers people who whose ambition for their physique goes above and beyond bare minimum.
So like if, if, if you've got an ambition for your physique, which is a little bit beyond just kind
of adding some muscle and feeling better and being able to move better and all those things.
If you want to just kind of take the next step and just look much, much better, then you know that's
going to do that job for you.
It also kind of puts you on the road towards bodybuilding kind of as a sport.
So natural bodybuilding, sorry, as a sport.
So if you want to go down that route, then this is putting you on that road and you can carry on
moving down that road for a period of time.
And at some point you, you know, you can make a decision whether to take the next step and go to
maximalist or you know, whether to just say, actually, maybe this isn't for me.
I'm just going to kind of, you know, call this a day and be happy with my kind of physique and do
other things.
I mean, like there's options open to you so you can put yourself on the road towards bodybuilding
and like go down that road and see how you feel about it without, you know, as you say, going mad
about, you know, hundreds of different exercises.
So I think it's an interesting place to go.
I mean, it's not, if you do it, you know, as a full body kind of two or three times a week, it's not
hugely demanding.
It is demanding.
I mean, it's going to, you're going to feel it and it's going to take time out of your day, but it's
not going to be completely mad.
So I think it's an interesting kind of middle ground.
Especially if you don't need single cells like you could get this done in under an hour.
Oh, absolutely.
Yeah, totally doable.
Now, just before we move on to maximalist, so this minimalist bodybuilding plan, this is kind of
conversation we were having before we hit recall.
But I was saying, well, you'd have people who would benefit from taking that and then just seeing
that slightly because you might have like, a common question I'd have would be someone might come to
me and say, I want to build muscle.
I want to look like I lift, but I don't care about insert muscle.
I didn't care about glutes or I didn't care about traps or I didn't care about calves or there's
generally going to be 1-2, maybe 3 different muscles so that that individual.
So I just don't care about that.
I just want to build kind of everything else.
For guys, often it's going to be, you know, a little bit more upper body focus.
Girls often it's going to be a little bit lower body focus.
There's still going to be some upper or lower depending on the person muscles they want, but there
may well be, you know, 2 new muscles that they decide.
I just don't care.
You know, I've got plenty of advanced females who don't want triceps, long head, don't even want
additional elbow flex work beyond what they're getting in their back work.
Don't need it, yeah.
Exactly.
So all we would do in that situation, what was that?
Probably don't need the traps either.
No, no exactly.
And I mean you know, how much reck fem do some girls want?
You know, it's, it makes fitting into certain clothes harder.
So it's, it's gonna be up to that individual what they decide they don't need.
And all you're gonna do is take that bodybuilding minimus plan and you're just gonna identify which
exercise that I have for that muscle, which I don't want anymore.
And you just drop it off.
And as a general kind of, I guess like how that's looking for me and my clients, my dudes, my guys
are usually doing almost all of those exercises.
So of those, when we have 11, there's probably gonna be 10, maybe all 11 they're gonna do.
And my females, they tend to usually do about 8.
And I find that just across the board, females tend to need fewer exercises because there's usually
gonna be a couple more muscles.
They just don't particularly feel like they need pretty straightforward, fairly easy to to adjust.
And that's individual, you know, people can decide for themselves what that muscle is they do or
don't want.
And maybe you want all of them and you do all of an exercises.
So what is our step up from there?
OK, so this is where it gets really crazy.
So at this point, really the sky is kind of the limit.
I mean, like there isn't really a like the, the issue here is going to be more about the
availability of information to help us make decisions.
It's not so much going to be about the, the existence of different areas so much as our knowledge of
how to train them.
So what you'll find is that there can be some large muscles and I'm going to be like just don't have
enough data to know how to train different parts of these muscles.
There's going to be smaller areas like the elbow flexors where I can literally give you 4 or five
exercises and they'll all train different parts, The elbow flex complex.
And that's not because, you know, magically the elbow flex is somehow is kind of, you know, got more
divisions in.
It's just simply because that's where all the data is.
So you just got to be aware that when I say like, there's probably only really two exercises that I
would use to train different parts of the glute, it's not because you can't segment it more.
You can.
It's just that we don't know how to go about training different parts of the glute in a way that is
meaningful.
So future data hopefully, hopefully will help us do that and there'll be other possibilities.
But right now it's really, really difficult to start segmenting that.
Sorry to start targeting those segments with specific exercises.
You can segment it anatomically, just don't know how to train those different parts.
So with the information we do have, what would we?
So let's start with the.
Same.
Yeah, do the same thing again.
So if we start working way down the body, you've got glue.
You can obviously train the upper and the lower glute separately.
So you can train the lower glute with your hip thirsty glute bridge and you can train the upper
glute with your seated hip abduction.
I mean that's pretty much going to give you maximum coverage.
If you want to get sogmogenesis in the glute, then you're going to add on your kind of your probably
your leg press honestly, because you get better range of motion for the hip than you do in a squat
and.
We did a whole podcast on that, so if you guys want to know more about it.
Yeah, we literally talked for an hour on that before.
So, so, so that would be then that would then, then me glue.
Similarly with hamstrings, there's quite a lot going on there.
You could probably get quite a long way with seated leg coat, which would give you the 32 joint
hamstrings more so in the lower part of the muscle.
That's so in the upper part and it would give you some psychomatogenesis.
It wouldn't really do very much for the kind of by smallest shorthead.
So you'd have to add in a lying leg curl to do that and that will get you a very long way to those
two.
If you wanted to push further, you could get the upper parts of the two joint muscles by doing 45°
back extensions.
And that would probably be the absolute kind of maximum at the moment that we've got in terms of
data availability.
Or once again you could do the top like the stiff leg rag pull instead of the back extension.
Sure, absolutely.
In terms of adductor stuff, you would need an adductor, Magnus, and you would need the other
adductors.
So you'd need your.
I mean, your leg press would do it for you.
So you'd have that already baked in from the glute work, you were doing, stretch position glute
work, and you would have then seated hip adduction, which would give you everything else.
So that for me, and again, there's data suggesting you can mess around with maybe resistance
profiles, but honestly, at the moment, I think it's a little bit on the sketchy side.
So I would kind of just go with those two and say that's giving you 99% to what you're going to get.
Quads is really annoying to me because on the face of it, it looks like an extension should give you
everything.
I'm not convinced it does.
I think that you get a little bit more single joint with a leg press, but I'm not prepared to argue
that I don't, I don't want to try and have to make a case for that.
I just, that is my gut feel.
So we'll see what happens in the future, but that's kind of my my kind of standpoint.
But honestly, in this context doesn't matter because you've already got a leg press for.
The.
And made out to Magnus.
So you've got it baked into your program already, can't really do without it.
So honestly really doesn't make sense.
If you want to argue with rec fem that you've got distinct upper and lower regions, you're going to
need a hip flexion exercise for the top part of the of the rec fem.
OK, we're at what, 88 exercises?
It's just crazy.
Already isn't.
It I think we're 8 without the second direct fem exercise.
So if you wanted to do like a hanging knee raise or something like that, then we'll be a lot.
Exercise.
A lot of a lot of European gyms that I've spent time going to have a four way, a four way hip
machine, you know, which allows you to train hip flexion relatively well.
I don't see them so much in other parts of the world, but they do exist.
I mean, it's just not as common as many other exercises.
And then obviously for calves, you're going to need some kind of gastroc exercise, which is going to
be probably a toe press and a leg press.
I think that the solius probably does get trained pretty well in a leg press, but you know, you
could add in your kind of seated calf raise as well.
Yeah, and you?
That's nobody.
Potentially you could do toes in toes out with a standing car for.
Yeah, you could apply that to the hamstring stuff as well.
I mean, again, this is what I said.
The Sky's the limit.
You can really kind of go in all kinds of directions here.
But yeah, and there is data suggesting you can move things activation wise across those muscles.
So broadly speaking, generally each of those muscle groups are talking about three sets or three
different exercises per muscle group from from most of them really.
Groups, hamstrings, Adopters is 2, quads is 2.
Yeah, see for in my head, I, I look at thigh like in this situation I'd say, well, we got the 2 quad
and then we got the adductor.
So we kind of talk like 3 exercises for that part of the the.
Lens Rory, also in the thigh.
Well, yeah, I guess so.
It's broadly speaking, I think it averages around about two 2 to 2 1/2.
I mean, I don't think it's quite 3 for everything.
I mean, even with the glue, you could argue it's only really two because it's.
Overlap.
I guess it's it's kind of like 2 dedicated exercises and it's kind of like this third exercise which
is often doing 2.
Floating around in the background, Yeah.
But yeah, I mean, it's definitely 2.
I mean, that's really kind of you're going from bodybuilding minimalist or consolidated to
bodybuilding maximalist, definitely going from at least from one exercise to at least 2, potentially
3.
Really depends on on kind of how far you want to go with it and what he's trying to do.
But yeah, that's that's going to be lower body stuff.
I mean, it's going to be a bit crazy when we go to the upper body, but.
Yeah, the lower body part was the easy part.
I always say that to be when I'm doing a mentorship, I like OK, the lower body is the easy stuff.
I mean the upper body, it's much more complicated.
So regarding the upper body, we actually kind of had a fairly maximalist back programme already
because we had both regions that lat and we had traps and the rear delt does get trained pretty well
with a narrow grip pull.
So honestly back wise, I think we're in a pretty good place already from the minimalist bodybuilding
programme on the kind of maximalist side.
Does that mean you can't train other parts of the back?
No it doesn't.
You absolutely can.
It's just data wise are relatively limited in terms of how we might be able to do that.
Would you not suggest a pull over there?
Well, exactly.
So like, you know, are we getting a slightly different reason for that by doing a pullover, you
know, or is it just going to be so much more, you know, kind of Peck and triceps long head that it
makes it kind of less relevant as a as a as a late exercise?
Honestly, I'm kind of in the zone where I think of it as more of a Peck and a triceps bracky long
head really.
And then in the minimalist plan, we had a satchel plane row.
Now I feel like there's a bit of a push online at the moment to really move towards a transverse
plane row.
Is there anything that's giving?
Posterior posterior delt, which you're already getting very effectively from your narrow group
anyway.
So posterior delt doesn't really care whether you're going horizontal extension or such plane, you
know, kind of shoulder extension.
You're getting pretty good leverage in both cases.
So is there any anything that the transverse row is giving us that we're not getting elsewhere?
Transverse plain row is probably my least favorite biomechanical variation of a pulling exercise.
I I really don't think it does anything unique that the other plane planes aren't doing and I and I
don't think it does the traps in the way that people think it does either.
I I really don't like it as an exercise.
I don't think it had very much.
If anything, it would belong more in a minimalist plan because it it kind of does a few things
badly.
Yeah.
Well, that's true because in a minimalist plane you, well, yeah, I guess you're not too concerned
about Saturday or plane necessarily if you've got another lap.
But even though, even though I don't really like it, you know, so, so yeah, so back is pretty much
the same, I think maximalist and minimalist.
You could Chuck in every adult if you like, I know you're saying.
Yeah, if you really obsessed, you could do a read out fly.
I mean like that would be a much much better choice than I the transverse plane row.
And do you think there's any?
Yeah, So like any other backbuscles one could be.
Well, that's what I'm saying.
I think that there probably are or there definitely are.
But the point I'm making is it's very difficult to know precisely how to kind of target them.
I mean, like even within the lat, I mean we talk about the three major divisions in the lat, kind of
upper, middle and lower.
But the reality is you can actually segment it medially and laterally.
You know, there are definitely activation tendencies for media and lateral reasons of a lot, but how
we would go about making that work in an exercise setting is a little bit more difficult to
identify.
Yeah, OK.
Yeah, In my head, like I think we've had this conversation before about delts and if I had someone
who just wanted more back development, I would probably just throw in every Rd. that was like a
slightly different plane of of motion.
So.
Well, this is where we yeah, this is where we get to adults as well.
It's like, you know, delt wise we talk about three major divisions, but there's probably a good
seven or so.
So and they're all showing distinct activations with different planes of motion and directions and
that kind of thing.
So this is where the bodybuilding kind of idea of hitting a muscle from different angles makes a lot
of sense.
But precisely how you would do that?
The difficult part, that's what I'm saying.
Like the sky is the limit really.
But you know, the data availability isn't as good as as as we might want it to be.
So then moving on to delts.
Yeah.
I mean, like we've done, we've done kind of rare delts, but in terms of anterior and middle or
however many regions you want to kind of look at, then you're going to need, you know, a lateral
raise, which talked about, or a wide grip kind of behind the neck type press.
And then for anterior, you can need really anything that has peak effort above above the horizontal.
So this is the bit that people struggle with.
They kind of think about anterior adults and they start thinking about, you know, kind of front
raisers, which is curricular Peck exercise.
They start thinking about over pressing, but they end up hitting the peak effort somewhere below the
horizontal or at the horizontal.
Unlike guys, you've got to hit peak effort above the horizontal otherwise it's not working.
So it's really a range of motion thing rather than a plane of motion thing when it comes to the
anterior.
Dope.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
So what?
You might program a partial.
Yeah, just drop the seat all the way down in a seated overhead press.
Just try and get the effort to be, you know, higher up when it when it peaks.
And it's just a matter of finding that that range of motion.
I think that's the key thing.
Yeah, yeah, that's exactly what I'll do.
Just put the seat all the way down the bottom and this do some kind of headrest machine.
Yeah, chess.
Again, the minimalist version works OK.
You can do a wide grip press, you could do a PEC fly.
I mean, totally fine.
You can start to kind of get activation of different regions to a greater or lesser extent.
But honestly, I think that's, you know, really pushing into sort of individual territory where
you've identified A weakness because genuinely, I think a wide grip and I kind of either as I say,
chess fly or by grip bench is going to do the job.
But you know, you could, you could use, you know, kind of some narrow grip kind of bench for
curricular.
You could use, you know, sort of some standing cable crossovers in the front of plane.
If you want to get the lower 2 regions, you could work with that.
The pullover that we talked about as well for the the cost, I mean there's, there's stuff you can
add in.
It just comes down to what you think is is needed at that point.
Typically I would be programming a white, usually a white grip bench, but it could be a peg deck.
And then I would do a cable crossover like more in that frontal plane.
I don't know if you've seen them.
Some gyms actually have machines where it's imagine, imagine a lateral raised machine, but it's the
opposite.
So you're actually pulling into the midline.
They're quite good if if someone has access to.
One of those, yeah.
Otherwise I'd just do a cable sort of partial crossover and then I would normally do.
At the moment I'm using a lot of cable single arm front raise which I find is can be programmed
quite OK.
Stable.
You talked to me about a a lying front raise, didn't you?
A while back.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Because the little bit limiting the.
Phrase is that you're kind of more, you know, kind of you're limited to only train the curricular
pet.
You can't train the anterior adult with it.
So you're like, well, can we kind of change the range of motion we're working and start to have one,
that one variation that trains the curricular pet and the variation that trains the anterior delta?
I mean, that's, I mean, that's a really interesting idea.
Yeah.
But in this context of I was looking at upper chest, yeah.
Cool.
OK, So that, yeah, I mean, basically here we've just got a monstrous number of elbow flexion
exercises according to what you want to target.
I mean, again, it's just because there's the availability of data, but you know, we've got, you
know, you can train biceps brackie with kind of incline bench cable curls.
So peak effort in extended shoulder and extended elbow positions during brachialis with preacher
curls.
Train brachialis with kind of cable curl with peak effort in the kind of contract position.
You can use supination and pronation to move things more between vices.
Brachialis, Brachialis, Brachioradialis, sorry as well.
And you can probably get different parts of the device that's Bracky by doing a supination exercise
versus doing a standard curl.
Now I'm just going to repeat myself.
So there's 100 times people keep asking the same question.
Now you can't just do a supination of the dumbbell while you're doing curls because your supination
strength is way, way stronger than the ability to rotate a dumbbell.
So unless you've got offset dumbbells, it isn't going to work.
So you're going to need something that actually challenges supination, which is going to be a kind
of supination exercise and.
That which I've actually talked about that, I don't know if you've seen that any of you that I have
not, no, they talked about loading the dumbbells unequally for that purpose.
Yeah, I mean, you'd have to because people don't realise how strong they are in supernation.
I mean, it's, it's really, really quite marked kind of level of strength.
So you can't just kind of, oh, I'm just going to rotate the dumbbell.
It's not doing anything.
So, but yeah, so that would be kind of, as I say, lots of different possibilities.
Not very kind of it's not reflective of the like capacity of benefit you're going to get out of
doing that.
It's just that, availability of data.
So if you were to give people like some, I guess actual concrete examples there, I mean, what I
would only program would be a behind the back cable curl with it in a super native position.
So if I'm more biased as brachy, I would do a machine preacher curl and thinking about that more as
a brachialis exercise.
And then in that cable station, after I've done the behind the back cable curl, I would I would
normally just do like a top partial reverse grip cable curl for a bit more brachialis.
I think really I would focus on Recura Radialis as one option plus a either the preacher curl or the
incline bench cable curl.
I don't think you need 3 is like a starting point here.
I think probably 2 is OK.
But as I say, I mean there's the sky really is the limit when it comes to Obiflex data.
It's just enormous what we've got.
So yeah, people can use that information as they want to, but I would definitely have two, but
that's what we're saying all the way along.
It's like 2 probably is a good number to target for a maximalist program to make it worth kind of
calling a maximalist program.
And then in terms of triceps really you've kind of got three things going on here because you've got
you know you've got your long head is going to be sort of your pushed down, you're going to have
your pullover probably for the other part of the trisets bracky long head.
And then you've got you're pressing is already probably.
Yeah.
So yeah, again, two probably is going to go there.
So yeah, I mean, I think you can, I haven't been counting, but I think you're going to end up with
with just over double the number of exercises you'd have in a minimalist.
Yeah, I lost count as well.
I think one thing because when we're talking about the minimalist, I made the point about like a
consolidated versus true minimalist.
And then when we talk about maximalist, we kind of got those two categories as well.
Because you do maximalist mini where you're doing just a single set and you're just doing those sort
of, you know, 2 exercises or whatever that you've, you've suggested there.
Or you could have a maximalist way you're trying to achieve the fastest rate of growth as well and
not just the highest sort of ceiling of potential for growth.
And you know, based on your recovery data, we'd say, well, maybe that's going to be about, let's
say, three sets per muscle, right?
So in some of those, those muscle groups where you've identified 2 exercises, you've got the option
now if you could do 2 sets for one of those and one set for another, or you could do a unilateral
version or whatever.
My preference just as a framework that I work off is just to add a third exercise.
And even if you know, as you've identified, maybe we don't have the information to know exactly how
to pick that third exercise to necessarily, you know, be as different as possible treatment.
I think we're still getting paid lease motivation boost from having a a single set of a new
exercise.
And obviously in this context, the goal is, is, you know, that rate of growth as well.
And you know, incidentally, when we then plot out that plan, it looks essentially identical to Steve
Reeves 1950s plan.
Sure.
Yeah.
And I think you'd probably unless you, you, unless you have a really high tolerance for kind of pain
and discomfort, you're probably going to gravitate towards doing a, B, A/B, A/B in this kind of
situation.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
So, so you could just then, I mean, you've done a podcast on this.
You can then take that plan and then you can split it up.
Divide it into two.
Yeah, I would.
I would absolutely do that.
I mean, otherwise I think you, you, you're either going to be a bit obsessed or you're going to be a
bit unhappy, I think, yeah, I wouldn't do this as full body AI.
Do this as full body A/B, A/B, A/B.
I do, I do have a group which is based exactly this.
It's my my games maxing group.
And that's essentially the format is, you know, three exercises per muscle single sets.
And I've got, I don't know, maybe 2530 people who are that way in line, who are in that group.
And, you know, some people, like, you know, some people do have the energy and the motivation.
And I think a big part of it comes down to motivation.
You know, I think people can do this.
Are you motivated to do it And for?
I mean, that's the thing.
I mean, people run marathons, don't they?
I mean, so they can do this.
I mean, it's, it's, it's doable.
It's just a bit miserable towards the end.
It is.
It does get that way.
That's sometimes.
Just as a starting point, because again, we're trying to kind of talk about, you know, what's what's
the starting point sensibly for these three categories?
A starting point sensibly for this category would be doing alternating workouts and dividing the
exercises into two categories and just covering the whole body each time, but with slightly
different emphasis on each day, you know, and that's, you know, as you say, slower rate of progress,
but ultimately a higher ceiling for growth.
So but yeah, I think just in terms of where people are at, like you pointed out at the beginning,
people are going to have maximalist tendencies for specific muscle groups and minimalist for others.
So most people are going to take the minimalist bodybuilding as a starting point and then look at
the maximalist and go, well, OK, I'm happy with most stuff, but I do want bigger arms or, you know,
I do want to like, you know, girls are going to be like, OK, well, I want both glute exercises in.
Cool.
I mean, that's just one extra exercise.
It's not a big deal.
Yeah.
So literally what you could do if you want to construct the perfect workout for yourself is write
out all the muscles we just talked about.
And then next to it put a little note.
Do you want minimalist or do you want maximalist?
Or are there some that you just?
Stress out that you don't want at all.
And then you go, you re listen to our minimalist, our maximalist segment of this episode, and you
can write out those exercises that correspond with that.
And then there's your plan.
And if it's too much to do in a single workout, split it AB and if it fits then just do it AAA.
Absolutely so.
And just always remembering that the the only three frequency options that you really have are full
body A twice a week, full body A three times a week or full body A/B, A/B, A/B three times a week.
Those are the only options.
You can't do full body AB twice a week.
It doesn't work.
You have to do it in one of those 3 possibilities.
So obviously most people are doing full body A twice a week are going to be just in the first
category, the bare, bare minimum sort of four exercises.
Everybody else is probably either going to be doing full body A or full body A/B, A/B, A/B.
Yeah.
Or, you know, as we've talked in the previous episode, you can take this and then cut it up.
Yeah.
I mean, if you want to do up and lower, I mean split down, but again, the same rules apply.
So if you're doing up and lower, you still and it's only four times a week that you're going to the
gym, you're treating that as full body a twice a week split into two, two halves.
So you can't do different workouts on each of your two kind of upper sessions need to be two lower
sessions.
That doesn't work.
And again, that's one of the big areas that the consolidated guys keep falling into, yes.
Yes, exactly.
Sets.
I think we've covered that along the way.
Repetitions.
There's nothing magic we need to talk about that.
Just don't do anything, don't do anything silly and you should find to recover.
Don't do anything silly.
It's like people, people doing kind of like, you know, 20-30 kind of Rep Max's.
Yeah, OK, that would be silly.
Yeah, I think that's probably it really.
I mean there's I'm trying to think how else can someone stuff this up?
Mess this up, yeah.
And you know, rest between your exercises, I think hopefully I mean like you have no choice because
you have to set it up if you're doing single sets.
You're doing well.
Some some people get a little bit obsessive about their warm ups.
I've had some people write to me saying, oh, I tried to do this 12 exercise full body program three
times a week, but it took me like an hour and a half each time.
And I'm like, precisely, are you doing that isn't the actual exercises?
And it turns out they're, you know, some people have really hooked into this idea of doing, you
know, kind of always doing only 5 stimulating reps.
And so they have to warm up quite a lot because they're doing really heavy loads and they end up
their warm up then isn't correct because they're not doing more reps, they're doing more upsets.
So when you look at their warmth, they're not doing multiple sets of 10 with increasing load until
they finally get to their work set of five.
And they're just, yeah, absolutely exhausted by the time they actually do this at 5:00.
And you're like, don't do this at 5, Do a survey to 10 and just do a couple of warm up reps on your
way up to doing that load.
I mean, I'm not talking about technical lifts.
I'm not talking about squat, bench, that things like that.
Literally doing my machine exercises in a gym for bodybuilding purposes.
You can literally do more reps, not warm up sets.
And you shouldn't be spending more than a couple of minutes getting ready to do your work set.
It shouldn't be a thing.
Really warm up sets make more sense for consolidated plans where you're doing multiple sets like you
might be doing, you know, Regpath 3 by 5, OK, great, you might have your two warm up sets.
But if we're doing these single sets, three different, two or three different exercises per muscle
group sets of eight to 10, you don't, you don't need your two warm up sets.
You just need a couple of warm up reps to make sure that your body still works in the way that
you're expecting it to and that nothing hurts and that you've got your post activation potentiation
effect.
And you could, I mean, yes.
So again, excessive warps and again, you know, people doing, you know, crazy amounts of cardio
before they start strength training programme.
Like, you know, just don't trying to think of anything else that people are doing that's not right.
I will look at that Maximus.
Plan and think how could I possibly do that's going to take Me 2 1/2 hours lit it in half but but
another point I want to make is there's.
Plenty of options.
We ran through like even when we were talking about elbow flexors, right?
And I was like, hey, I would do behind the back cable curls and I'll do a partial top reverse grip
cable curl.
Great, fantastic.
Do it in the same station.
Just get a little bit creative.
With it, you know so.
Often I'll talk to people, they'll be like, I can't fit all this and it takes me too long.
And I'll be like, you know what exercise you're doing.
Oh, you know, in this station I'm doing, you know, I'm doing a, I'm using a back machine and I'm
doing a lap pull down and a back machine and then I'm moving over to the cable station and I'm doing
a cassetral plane row cable.
I think some people get really tied up and needing to do the same.
Muscle group exercises back-to-back.
So they're like, oh, because I've just done this back exercise, I now need to do another back back
exercise.
It's like 1.
Not really.
You don't that's that's one mistake.
Spot on convenience, but then the other.
Mistake as well is not realizing a.
Lot of machines you can do.
Multiple exercises.
As you know, if you add a you're doing a shoulder press machine, like you said, put the seat all the
way down, do your close grip, do your your top partial anterior delt exercise.
Do you, you know, wide grip frontal plane behind the neck style exercise like this?
Absolutely.
If I'm programming a maximus plan, almost always I'm going to I'm going to be getting people to do
more than one exercise of the section, unless it's like a leg extension where this is like nothing
else they can do there or leg curl.
You can go straight from your leg press to your car phrase toe press, you can go.
Exactly.
Narrow grip row straight into your Kelso you absolutely.
I mean, there's a whole bunch of these that you can just kind of double up and even if you're not
using machines, when I program this stuff for people just at home.
Gyms, yes, OK, there's some stuff we can't do, but just using dumbbells and barbells, you can really
creatively do a decent maximus plan at a bench.
You can do 10 different exercises at a single bench, just with different dumbbells.
You know, you just need to be creative If you want this to fit and and sort of be, you know,
accessible and convenient, you can do it.
You just need to think about it and if you've done it once and you've written down the loads.
That you're using, then you can actually do it in a way.
I mean, we talked about this in the silver area context before.
You can do it in a way where you're you're loading is going always in the same direction.
Either you start with your heaviest load for whatever exercise you've got best leverage on and you
work downward and you're taking stuff off.
Or you're the opposite direction.
You start with the lightest and you add stuff on as you go through.
And it means that you're not constantly going backwards and forward between a light load and heavy
load, and you constantly change.
I'm assuming that you're using adjustable dumbbells, but I'm not assuming you've got a whole
dumbbell, right in that context.
Yeah.
Yeah.
And the other thing on that that you would do as well is.
Have give yourself a wider repetition range.
Don't like if I've got someone doing at home gym stuff, I'm not going to say to 8 to 10, it'll be
like do 5 to 12 or 5 to 15 because again, in the example, and again, you can use the same weight,
use the same load exactly and.
If you do, you're behind the back behind.
The neck and you get 12 reps and then you get 6 reps with you in front of the neck.
I didn't care.
I just use the same load again.
This, as I say, this comes back to people.
Getting very, very kind of kind of tunnel vision on specific things that we've said in the past,
which is like, yeah, technically aiming for five stimulating rates probably is kind of
physiologically the right answer.
But practically if you want to kind of capture this excise selection, you know, kind of availability
that we've got here, then you are going to need to make some compromises, small ones, you know,
around some of the other stuff and like, but these are probably some of the, I mean the excise
station stuff is probably the best compromise because it really doesn't, it's not really losing that
much to it's not even a compromise.
Ranges is a very.
Very small compromise.
If you're having to push up to 810 repetitions, that's a small compromise.
It's it's there, but it is really not that big a deal, you know, So yeah, I mean, I think yeah,
everything else is just kind of structuring.
I mean, it's, it's just structuring Exactly.
Yeah, yeah.
But it's.
You What you don't want to do is allow something that doesn't matter to then impede on the stuff
that does matter, give you tunnel vision, and stop you thinking about other decisions that you can.
Make or help you.
Yeah, I mean, I think ultimately I keep coming back to this concept which is that focus of
attention.
I mean, we talk about focus of attention in a physiological.
Sense like, you know.
What you're actually looking at and thinking about when you're doing an exercise, and that's a
separate thing.
What I mean is when you're planning something, focus of attention is really, really dangerous.
You get it wrong.
So like if your focus of attention is so directed on like the Rep range, so like I have to do fiber
and your brain like starts to just remove all other information around it.
And you start to get really kind of trapped in optimizing for that variable.
But you lose the ability to actually see ways to make your life easier with other things.
You have to widen your perspective.
Go, what am I really trying to do?
I'm trying to get really good coverage across multiple exercises in a sensible period of time so I
don't lose motivation by the end of my session.
I can capture all of this benefit every single time I go in the gym.
If your obsession with hitting five repetitions every single time is causing you to spend 90 minutes
in the gym with all these warm ups and like, and you're forgetting that you can structure your
workout in a way that has these exercises in this order and you know, do these things to make the
flow quicker.
You're missing all of that because of your tunnel vision on the one thing.
You know, I think if anything, that is probably the root of the problems that I see when people are
asking me questions.
The single thing that so like I get a lot of questions on Instagram and when I read them, people
write me paragraphs about their problems in the gym and what they're trying to struggling with.
And, and often I really struggle to answer the question because immediately I can see the problem
isn't the problem.
No, no, no, no.
The problem goes way.
Further back, the problem is actually.
And so if you if somebody's listening to this and they are actually one of these people who writes
me these essays, then the problem is not the problem you think it is.
The problem is that you are obsessing about one thing that is not big enough to obliterate all the
other things that you've got to worry about.
You've got to look at holistically and make compromises and decisions about everything.
And what we're trying to do here is give you a framework to do that and then troubleshoot what we've
just been doing in the last 1020 minutes.
Troubleshoot the times when you're struggling.
It will be because you are over obsessing about one thing that in the context is not as important as
you think it is.
Yeah, yeah, exactly right.
And if that reduces?
The number of essays that I get sent on Instagram, I'd be happy.
Well, the.
Difficulty is it's hard to answer those questions.
Like a lot of time I.
Don't answer them because, well, I can't exactly.
You have to answer the thing that's that's.
Not even spoken.
Like you do have to go further back to answer it and they don't realize what it is that they're
asking because someone thinks then you're trying to explain and it's like it would.
Just take, you know, kind of far too long for us to to get through that process.
And then maybe even they're complete different time zones.
So they you're then kind of sharing messages like every 12 hours or whatever.
So it just doesn't work for us.
So, you know, like if you feel like you've written me a long essay on Instagram and I've ignored
you, not because I don't want to help, it's because I don't write your long essays and you ignore
me, OK?
OK.
Less said about that, but yeah, so yeah, it's not a kind of desire to actually ignore you.
It's just because I don't feel like I can actually help in a meaningful way.
I mean, really, what we're pointing to here is the importance of knowing.
How to think about the thing, right?
Like in this whole thing we're saying, hey, how we want you to be thinking about this is what
muscles are you wanting to develop?
How does it look like to develop that satisfactorily for your goal?
You know, they're like really, you know, what variables then are going to to help you move towards
that and what's going to hold you back and not actually contribute to that in any meaningful way?
Like really, I think we always said be asking why we asking what we're asking?
We need to be going to the question behind the question.
The goal is to keep the goal the goal.
So that's.
The thing that people forget, they, they like, they, they assume that they know what they're doing,
that they know that what they're doing matters and that they, you know, the thing in front of them
is the thing that is causing the problem.
And it's not what you've got to do is am I keeping the goal, the goal?
That's the first question.
Or am I getting distracted by thinking about 1 small component of my journey towards the goal, like
Rep range?
Am I getting so obsessed with Rep range I'm forgetting about the impact on the other things in my
program that my obsession is creating?
If I'm obsessing about Rep range so much that I'm having to do tons and tons of warm ups and it's
chewing into my ability to, you know, kind of get my work done in an hour, that is now becoming a
problem because I'm over obsessing about this one thing and it's causing negative side effects and
all this stuff.
So am I keeping the goal, the goal?
Am I keeping my purpose of, you know, maximizing hypertrophy of the whole body in every session, or
am I getting sidetracked into obsessing about hitting five reps in every single exercise?
Because that's obviously a negative.
So I'm not keeping the goal the goal.
So I'm, I'm violating rule number one rule #2 am I actually aware of all the things that matter?
Am I aware of all the things that matter?
Or am I again, just focusing on one?
So both of these questions are two ways of asking the same question.
Am I keeping the goal of goal?
Am I actually doing the things that matter?
Secondly, am I doing all the things that matter or am I like getting laser focused on one thing?
And the reality is that when other fitness influencers talk about people who are suffering paralysis
by analysis, it's often not paralysis by analysis.
Paralysis by analysis.
Analysis would actually technically would actually work because if you just kept going you'll get
the answer.
The problem is they get stuck because they are analysing 1 variable and assuming that they need to
optimise that one variable.
If they just carry on and look for the optimization that is the best solution across multiple
variables, they'll get the right answer.
The problem is they get stuck at 1 variable.
Let's let's conclude with that rant.
OK, so can you.
Can you just I want you to expand on that a little bit because I, I think there's something really
valuable in that.
And I don't know that people are realizing it because that is obviously that's like the number one
critique of the science based lifting world, right, is that people getting too fixated, they're
getting too detailed, looking at the minutiae too much.
And you know, it's leading to these silly experimentations and people are wasting their time and
blah, blah, blah, blah.
And what you said there, I think is really a street is you're saying no.
The trouble is that they're not doing that enough.
They're not identifying all of the variables that they need to go down the rabbit hole in.
They're stopping at just one of those, maximizing one of those at the expense of all these other
ones potentially.
And that's why it's not working, not because they're maximizing one thing, but they're forgetting or
excluding these other ones, correct.
So before before I do that, let me just.
Kind of mention that I am a big fan of experimentation.
I think that it's one of the best things about humanity is our ability to experiment and try stuff
and and do interesting things.
And I think that people who object to experimentation and, you know, kind of the whole idea of
science is experimentation really and discovering new things have, you know, I, I just don't like
the attitude.
I think it's a bad, a bad thing.
So I'm a big supporter of the people who do the experimentation.
I think it's great when they do that.
I'm yeah, I'm delighted that they experiment with ideas that I've created.
And I don't, I don't, I really don't like the kind of the the push against that.
I think it's, it's, it's a bad attitude.
Anyway.
So in terms of this idea, what I'm saying is that if you imagine you've got a a surface, OK, you've
got a surface like a piece of cloth.
Now for a single variable, you could put a like a marble on the cloth and it would create a local
minimum for that variable.
And you're going around looking for local minimum minim, minimi.
I don't know what the plural is, a minimum point.
You're looking for multiple minimum points and you're looking for all these and they're all these
marbles in the can of cloth and they're creating a indentation in the cloth.
And you go and find one of those minimum points and you go, OK, I've found my minimum point for Rep
range.
It's five.
I'm, I'm, I'm going to try and optimize everything for five repetitions.
And then you realize that that local minimum for that particular point is nowhere near the local
minimum points for everything else.
And you get stuck because you're like, well, I've, I've got my, I've got my local minimum point
here.
And now you're trying to carry it with you as you go and experiment and try and find all, not
experiments, sorry, research and find all the other minimum points that you want.
So you want minimum point for, you know, the creation of the workout.
You want to be like, oh, I want to keep my workout short.
Possible.
I don't want a 90 minute workout.
And you realize that local minimum point is like 4 miles away.
It's nowhere near where you are.
And you're like, oh, well, I'm stuck.
And so you sit there holding your local minimum for five repetitions and you're looking around
going, how do I move forward?
And you're like, I can't, there's nowhere to go.
And that's the paralysis point because it's not paralysis by analysis.
It's paralysis because you're emotionally attached to the thing that you've just grabbed and you
can't let go of it.
Move over there and try and find a way to minimise your workout duration if what you'll find is that
your actual optimum point probably doesn't have any of your local minimums.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
I feel that somewhere.
Else that is not visible to you and.
What you've got to do is you've got to go through and you've got to look and you've got to
understand every single local minimum point, which is literally how the Physiology works.
And that's what we've been talking about forever.
You've got to understand where all those local minimum points are.
And then you would go, OK, now how do I balance all of these local minimum points in a way that gets
me to an optimum kind of location?
You're going to have to prioritize and you're going to have to go, how much do I lose by moving from
5:00 to 7:00 or 5 to 8 reps?
How much do I move by moving?
From three times a week.
To two times a week.
Oh wow, no, that's a really big one.
I shouldn't do that.
OK, so you make decisions very quickly by seeing how much of A magnitude you lose.
How much do I lose by chopping out a whole bunch of exercises?
Oh, wow, that's quite a big difference.
If I do that, I'm not going to do that.
I'm going to keep my exercise selection.
So what you have to do is go through all of these points.
So the problem isn't paralysis by analysis.
The problem is that you're not doing the analysis for all of the things emotionally detaching from
the specific components of your program that you've got overly emotionally attached to, and then
finding what your optimum point is by combining all of that information to get to a program that
actually works.
So the problem, this is paradoxical, but the problem isn't that you're being overly cognitive.
Paralysis by analysis suggests you're being overly cognitive.
It's not probably being overly emotional.
Yeah, that's all that coming.
OK.
I'm allowed to say that.
Basically the problem is you're overly emotional.
If you take all the emotion out of it, which is what I did a very long time ago, then I actually get
to a point where the joy of discovery becomes the interesting thing.
And you can take a concept like 5 repetitions being the optimal for a fatiguing point, as in
stimulus to fatigue ratio, and hold that in your mind as being something good.
And then continue on your journey and continue learning about all the other things because you're
not emotionally attached to trying to keep that benefit that you've obtained.
You just let it go and you move on.
And ultimately the problem isn't, as I say, paralysis by analysis.
It's paralysis by emotional attachment to a particular training variable that you've become overly
obsessed with.
You said something in that where you said.
That the like the plan you finish up with ultimately is probably not going to have any of those.
No, it's not.
It's really not.
No, I that's so.
Interesting because like you literally it, it'll be such a funny skit.
To do like, you know, have all these variables listed out and be like, what's the optimal for each
of these variables?
So optimal reference, what's the optimal recipe?
So optimal exercise number per per muscle, whatever.
And you almost never end up with any of those.
Exactly.
Then what's the optimal program?
None of those, probably.
I mean, you could even argue that 3 1/2 times.
A week is better for them than three times a week.
For frequency.
I mean by and how many people do 3 1/2 * a week or how many.
So again, you could, I mean, I, I think frequency and exercise selection probably are you kind of
the bonds you're going to end up closest to those two local minimums, you know, but ultimately a lot
of the other stuff you're going to have to make compromises on.
And it's, it's just to try and find your overall optimum kind of point for the entirety of your kind
of training variable selection.
But as I say, not a cognitive problem, it's an emotional problem, but almost all human problems are.
I went through this same program.
Problem with my own programming where I enjoy, I wanted to stick to five repetitions because I
enjoyed it.
You didn't have to like there was no wasted work at the recovery was good and it was holding me back
just in terms of how many exercises I could do.
And you know what, like all these other variables that we've discussed that ultimately probably
going to take me further than just doing those five repetitions.
The exact example we're giving.
And I resisted it for like a year.
And then eventually I was like, oh, crap, I I can't be the guy that's assisting 5 repetitions if I
want my workouts to be better.
These higher repetitions, which I've been emotionally, you know, sort of, yeah.
Opposed to for so long, actually, they've got a place here and we say higher, I mean, like 8 to 10.
I mean, it's not all that much higher.
Well for me now I'm basically trying not to use a gym pen.
Because the the effort involved in using going up as high as 12 to 15 in some cases, something like
calf rays or yeah.
Some of those exercise the calf rays will do.
15 yeah.
It's just, if I and you know, obviously I'll try to pick unilateral or whatever, I've put a good
calf machine at one gym that I'm going to, I can do that unilaterally really nicely and I'll do
that.
But otherwise, it's just I would prefer now to I like, I think I'm, I wouldn't prefer, but I feel
like I'm getting more out of not having to waste time and effort and load up or, you know, Jim pins,
whatever else and just do that single set with, with, you know, moderate repetitions, even though
ideologically I like the idea of just doing 5 repetitions, so.
People you can get, you can emotionally detach.
I've I've managed to make it from hating full body to now it's almost all I do from hating high
repetitions to now doing these single moderate reps.
You can you can get there all righty.
I feel like we covered multiple topics in one but it was it was a fun chat.
Is there anything you want to leave everyone with?
Nope.
No, I think I've probably talked enough for today.
OK, well, thank.
You everyone for joining us.
Thank you for everyone who's.
Signed up to our transcendent coaching certification.
I'm super excited to be journeying with you guys for a year starting in just a couple of weeks.
There is still a couple of weeks to sign up, so if you are interested in that then we've still got
info on our pages.
Otherwise, can't wait for the year ahead.
Thank you, everyone, and we'll be back next week with another episode.