Episode: 037 How to grow muscle only training once per week
URL: https://open.spotify.com/episode/5OxQYTT546yzOxxc2jGqyB
Published: 2026-02-02
================================================================================

Welcome back.
Thank you for joining us for another episode.
I'm joined by Chris.
How are you doing today?
I'm all right.
Thanks, Jake, even though we just spent an hour trying to decide what we're going to talk about
today.
Showing people behind the scenes now we, we were prepared.
We had multiple topics to talk about.
Don't don't let the people know.
So let's let him in on what we are going to talk about today because we've had you got this question
this week.
And I've had this question a little while ago.
Someone asked me this.
And I suspect we probably both had a similar response initially where when I was first asked it, I
thought, don't ask it like it's, it's, it's a silly question.
Like the the answer is like, just simply don't do it.
Just don't do this thing.
And then I thought about it more and I was like, well, actually, firstly, I understand that there
may be some requirement to do it in some situations, OK, some things might be out of your control.
And then I thought it's actually a fairly interesting thing to think about as to what would be the
best way to answer this question.
So the question was, is someone can only train once a week, How would they do that?
What would be the best way to set out, set up a workout plan for once a week?
Did you have a similar kind of thought pattern as me when you were presented with a question, or
were you more more graceful than me?
No, not at all.
As soon as I had the question or the first two or three times I had the question, I didn't receive
any context.
So people just asked me, you know, how do I set up a program where I'm only training, only going to
the gym once per week?
Not even in the context of like a bro split where they want to do, you know, kind of one workout for
each muscle group, but actually genuinely only going to the gym one time per week.
But no context was provided.
So I was just like, don't do that.
That's silly.
Just literally go twice and try and, you know, do shorter sessions.
And you must be able to make that happen.
More recently, people have been providing me with context.
And I think really it was I had a couple of questions on Friday in my Instagram question session,
and some people were helpful enough to provide me with the context.
They explained to me that they live in an area where there are not very many gyms.
And the gyms that they can go to are maybe, you know, have limited hours and also they work maybe
shifts or they work very long hours.
And when they finish for the day, the gyms are actually closed.
And so the only time they can go to the gym is this single, you know, day at the weekend or where
whenever it is that they have a day off, whatever sector they may be working in.
And that context was helpful for me to realise that this is a genuine question that people want the
answer to.
And they're not just trolling me.
They actually want to know how to organise their, you know, kind of training sort of schedules
around the fact that they have this limitation.
So I think, yeah, initially I was not graceful about answering the question.
Now that I've been provided with the context and I understand what the problem is, then, yeah, let's
answer it.
Let's do the best we can.
Yeah, exactly.
That's, that's how I felt about it.
And you know, I've had some people since tell me, you know, they're travelling and they can only
access the gym once a week.
And again, in that situation, like, Oh yeah, I can understand why this might be a beneficial thing
to talk about and the conversation may head in this direction.
But normally I would preface that that sort of question when someone says give me a plan for once a
week, I would ask, are you able to train any more frequent than that?
Even if it's not twice a week, could it be once every five days?
Because I think even if you're able to do once every five days, that opens you up with a lot more
possibilities than once every seven days.
And we'll probably talk about that a little bit more in a moment anyway.
But we're getting ahead of ourselves, or at least I'm getting ahead of myself.
I want to talk about a plan today.
And you said we were chatting about what to talk about and I was trying to find a plan to talk about
because it's not easy to find a plan that's once a week.
And even you then suggested, well, what about a growth spit where they're training a muscle once a
week?
And I even had a bit of a challenge finding one of those because in the silver area, they simply
didn't exist.
And even when we look into the golden era, like early golden era, they also didn't particularly
exist.
And we've made this comment before where we see this really interesting kind of sort of shift I
guess as we enter into the post steroid era and we see some things start to change and some things
don't.
And we do see volumes change, we see set numbers change and maybe repetition sometimes get a little
bit higher.
We see rest periods change.
But early on we don't particularly see frequency change that much.
We might see like a two way split emerge and then those people might train six days a week, but we
don't particularly see per week per muscle frequency change.
And sure, much later on that will happen and there might be some outliers in the golden era as well.
But generally speaking, a lot of these plans that are using a, some form of a split routine, they
still tend to be a two way split or they might actually be an AMPM split.
So they might have like a, a four way split or something like that, but they're still doing each
muscle group every second day or so because they're doing this AMPM, however many sessions, 10
sessions a week or whatever it might be.
And so it's interesting just noting that this idea of training a muscle once a week simply didn't
really happen for a very long time.
The history of bodybuilding and you know, certainly up until I would say sort of, you know, late
80s, did this not become sort of the dominant way of training?
So I've not succeeded in finding a good grow split plan for you all today.
And the best I've been able to present you with is a two way or two times per week, two way split.
Now this is a plan from John McCallum.
And John McCallum, you guys may not have heard about him because he didn't he, he did compete, but
more at like an amateur level.
OK, so he didn't win Mr. Universe or Olympia or anything like that, but he did write some really
interesting books.
So some people may have read his books or heard of his books.
I think his most popular Ke Keys to progress, I think is, is one of his, There's a few other books
he's he's published and, and you know, gross sort of in the 60s and 70s, potentially even later than
that as well.
And he was, I guess a big proponent of what would you call it, I sort of this bridging period
between the silver and golden era where a lot of the routines still kind of looked somewhat similar
with using, you know, more free weight exercises, barbells, dumbbells, some of these multi joint
exercises.
And I guess it was, it was a little bit more of a traditionalist in that sense at a time with some
of these new golden era methods were being developed and were being spread.
So this plan, it did come from the early 60s and I would say it does resemble a lot of what we would
see in the silly era.
But the format is a little bit different.
So two way split and the workout 1 was repeated twice a week, Monday and Thursday.
And then workout 2 was repeated twice a week, Tuesday, Friday.
So workout one, we have a squat.
So barbell squat 5 sets of five.
Now he didn't talk about the warm up sets here, so it's always hard to know.
Often people do like a, a pyramid of kind of like ramping up with the, the weight.
So I'm SUS.
I suspect the first couple of sets may have been warm up sets, but I'm not sure.
So squat 5 by 5 and then we have a, a calf raise, five sets of 30, a stiff leg deadlift, 5 sets of
5A bent over barbell row for five sets of five.
And then we had like a, a back pulley exercise.
I'm not sure if this was satural plane of this frontal plane.
There wasn't any pictures in the article, but it was a three sets of 10.
And then I pressed behind the neck.
So barbell behind the neck, five sets of 5A dumbbell lateral raise for three sets of 10 and then
hanging leg raise for three sets of 10.
So that was workout one.
And then workout two we have so workout one is was legs, back and shoulders.
And then workout 2 is chest, biceps and triceps and I guess ABS as well.
So workout two we have bench 5 by 5.
And then we have dumbbell flies, three sets of 10A barbell curl, 5 sets of five and then incline
dumbbell curls, three sets of 10 and then French press.
So that would be, I assume that would be seated with a, A barbell behind the neck, five sets of five
and then a triceps push down type exercise, three sets of 10 with the A cable and then sit ups for
three sets of 10.
So the format actually is a little bit similar in a sense to the Dorian plan we talked about last
week where it had a sort of a larger or multi joint exercise for a muscle and then was followed up
by a, a single joint or a smaller kind of muscle mass exercise for that same muscle group.
So it's interesting that there's this format which is consistent, I guess, in the early golden era.
What do you make of that plan?
So yeah, a few things jump out at me, but to to clarify, when we're looking at these exercises, do
we have any details on sort of the plane of motion, for example, in the row?
I mean, did he have a diagram of what he was doing?
No, unfortunately this article didn't have any pictures and generally when people did the row, most
of the time they were doing a wide degree of more transverse.
So the row is probably a transverse plane row.
The pulley exercise that follows it presumably is more likely to be a sagittal plane pull.
I would assume so and a lot of these because this was 1960, so a lot of the pulley type exercises
they did then they tended to be this sort of diagonal kind of like high to low type sagittal plane,
OK.
And similarly for the kind of following day or the following workout with the incline curl, is that
a sort of an incline bench curl where they're leaning backwards or is that a preacher curl where
they're leaning forwards?
I believe that would have been an incline bench curl.
Yeah.
And in terms of the pulley exercise for the triceps, again presumably a standing.
I assume it, yes, I assume so.
That was generally what was available at that time.
Yeah, yeah.
So we can't be.
Steve and Steve Rees was using that exercise about 5 to 10 years earlier, yeah.
So we can't be really confident about exactly what the excise selections were here, but we can kind
of be, you know, sort of.
We can make some assumptions.
Yeah, we can be kind of, we can create some assumptions.
So in that respect, then I think generally there's some good excise selection here, but I also think
there's a bit of redundancy.
I think there would have been some better choices.
And I think that's interesting because often when we look at silver era programmes, the excise
selection is often very intelligently or intuitively put together.
And I think there's a little bit of intuition lost here, even though generally it's good.
I mean, don't get me wrong, if somebody were to put a kind of exercise selection together like this
for an Apollo, it's not horrible.
But when I look at it, and just to be clear, there's some stuff in here I really like.
So, you know, I like the fact that we've got some hamstrings work.
Yeah, you would like that?
You don't tend to get in many of the silver era programmes.
I like the fact that the, if our assumptions are correct, I like the fact that we've got some
different planes of motion for backward.
We've got transverse and probably sagged to.
I don't like the fact that it's not frontal plane, but at least we have got, you know, a couple of
different planes of motion which means that we are training different parts of the back.
I'm not a fan of the press behind the neck plus the lateral raise, especially with the kind of
volumes that he's pushing here.
So honestly, with an upper lower split, I would say that five sets for a muscle group is pretty
toppy.
I think that's about as far as you can go.
So if you're doing 8 sets, I think that's way off the top end.
So the fact that you've got 5.
Do you think that those five so the behind the neck with sets of five.
So if you're.
Doing like the two.
Sets as a warm up, then maybe you're kind of pulling back and then OK, then it starts to make a
little bit more sense because then you've kind of got, you know, as you were pointing out at the
beginning, you've got this multi joint exercise to start with, followed by a single joint exercise
afterwards.
And you may be kind of getting five whole sets with the unilateral allowing you to maintain high
levels of recruitment all the way to the end of those five sets.
So yeah, no in the in the cut in the way that you're describing, I think that probably works.
But on the other hand, if then if that's not the way it's done, then it won't work because it'll be
too much, too much for you.
And it's interesting even just observing that all of those, those, those exercises he's doing 5 sets
on, they're the ones he's doing 5 repetitions on.
You know when he's doing 10 repetitions, he's doing fuel sets.
Sure, sure, sure.
So, yeah, So you can make the case that depending on how this is being done, it could work.
I'm just pointing out if somebody read this and went off and did it as written without thinking
about those assumptions behind the scenes, it's probably going to be too much for you.
So work out a the lower plus back.
So obviously we don't have a leg ascension and part of that is probably equipment availability, so
we can.
Most likely.
Probably give a concession there.
We do have a leg raise.
So technically speaking we are getting some hip flexor work, technically direct fem work.
So for the quads I mean really.
Beyond the squad.
So if you're asking me what's missing or what I would do differently, then I think frontal plane
back work is the thing that's missing.
Which tends to be missing in almost all the silly area plans.
Which tends to be missing in all the silver aeroplanes.
So again, historically, contextually is not surprising, which is why I said as a programme, I'm not.
I don't dislike this programme.
I'm just pointing out that I think there's a little bit of redundancy in a couple of places
depending on how you chop it up, depending on how you think it's been done.
And that behind the neck and then going into the dumbbell latch arrays, I don't know if you made
this point or not, but obviously the behind the neck, you are getting a good amount of middle dust
stimulus.
And then the Latrice, obviously you're kind of doubling up a little bit now as you pointed out by
going into that Latrice, you're kind of maintaining that stimulus.
But if you were to add a second shoulder exercise, would it even make any more sense to do one of
those more anterior duct?
Like obviously the behind the neck is kind of fairly even between both anyway, no?
Yeah, yeah, pretty much.
The problem is the lateral raise with dumbbells is starting to get to that point as well.
People don't realize that the most, the most difficult part of the lateral raise with the dumbbell
is the top of the range of motion, which is again going to start including your anterior dealt quite
a lot.
So honestly, they're not that different really.
It's just that you're higher recruitment in the lateral raise.
Again, that is depending on the person's leverages and where they find the exercise most difficult
and all the rest of it.
So if somebody's really struggling to lock out on their press behind the neck, then it really
becomes much more of an anterior dough exercise.
So workout one, there's not a huge amount of adjusting there required.
You're a bit skeptical about some of these volumes being recoverable volumes.
Then obviously you've mentioned their frontal pain for the back workout 2.
So workout 2, you've got exactly the same thing going on with the bench press and the fly that
you've got going on with the press bar and the neck Exactly to the extent that to the extent that
you're modelling what he's doing correctly, then it works because you know, your first couple of
sets of the five by five are kind of warm ups and he kind of and again, the heavier load makes it
less fatiguing.
So you kind of get some solid sets with your bench press, followed by some unilateral stuff with the
fly, and you end up with some really good Peck stimulus, assuming that you're using the same
transverse plane in both cases, which you probably are.
So exactly the same situation is going on.
It looks like he's following the same model for the curl and the incline curl.
But because we don't really know what those excises look like because the variations aren't clear,
it's tricky to know whether what he's really doing here.
Honestly, to me, it looks like the curl is probably a standing barbell curl, which is kind of
balanced between all of the different LO flexors.
And then the incline curl, probably depending on how it's done and you know, kind of what the
limiting factor is, could end up being similar.
It could end up being a little bit different.
I mean, I don't feel that to me, they're not the best to curl variations if you want to get either
the same thing that's going on with the bench press and the fly, which is not really possible with a
single joint exercise anyway, or if you want to actually target different parts of the elbow flex.
So that's not the way I would do it.
So for me, curls don't really work that well here.
I mean, it's just an elbow flexor pair of elbow flexor exercises.
There's nothing wrong with it, but honestly I would probably choose two different ones if I was
doing that.
Even doing a concentration curl would have made more sense.
Exactly, exactly.
That would have kept the same pattern as doing with the bench press plus fly or the behind the neck
press plus lateral raise because you're going from a bigger muscle mass to a less muscle mass
exercise keeping recruitment.
So can I push on that point?
So if we use the example of the bench, so he's done five sets of five, presumably one or two warm up
sets included there and then he's gone into a dumbbell fly.
So and you've made the point there that look, both are working similar parts of the chest most
likely depending on the person.
Now if he were to have just done and we would have a recovery issue here, I understand.
But if he had just done eight sets of the bench, he would have theoretically gotten less of a
stimulus on for his chest than by actually doing the fire sets of bench and then doing the family
instead of continuing on with more sets of the bench.
Yeah.
So just to be clear, what you're saying is that we're comparing 8 sets of bench with five sets of
bench plus three sets of flies.
And by doing the three sets of flies at the end, we're switching from by from a multi joint excise
to a single joint excise and therefore allowing recruitment to stay higher.
And the reason for that is because the number of muscles that are involved in exercise affects the
total amount of motor unit recruitment signal you need to create in the brain.
And the total amount of motor unit recruitment signal you create in the brain, which you can call
neurodrival, central motor command or whatever you want to call it essentially produces perceptions
of effort.
It's called the sensation of innovation, and that's sensation of innovation is obviously going to be
related to the, you know, number of places you've got to send recruitment.
If you've got fewer places, you have smaller sensation of innovation, you reach your maximum
tolerable protection of effort at a higher level of recruitment on an individual muscle basis.
It's very, very straightforward stuff.
So ultimately it's making use of that in multiple places in this program, which is, you know, it's
interesting phenomena.
It's exactly what we talked about.
Was it last week or before?
Yeah, last week with Dorian's plan.
Range plan.
Yeah, exactly.
It's it's really interesting to actually conceptualize because it makes one think why would someone
do a multi set plan that is doing 3 four sets of a multi join exercise?
If you want to do the multi join exercise, sure, you know, do your two sets, whatever, but why would
one not finish with it, even a single set of a single joint exercise afterwards?
Like it just there's not a compelling reason to just add more more more sets on a multi join
exercise.
There's definitely very rapid diminishing returns as we know from the matter analysis with those
responses that we've got.
So you start to creep up into the higher numbers of sets and really each extra set is doing minimal
extra benefit.
And so finding a way to increase recruitment for the muscle you're actually interested in I think is
a really good plan.
So let me ask one more question here then, because I actually think people won't will be confused by
this.
So his bench, he was doing sets of five and five has, has sort of become like the magics, you know,
repetition number where it's like, hey, this is where there's not really any, you know, wasted work.
You know, the, the, the sort of work is stimulus or stimulus to fatigue ratio is, is, you know, as
optimal as he can get.
And yet he's gone to then doing flies with sets of 10 and someone will look at that and be like,
well, hang on, five of those reps are useless.
And you know that's.
The machine out there.
Well, I, I know, I mean, that's that's the thing when I see people do plans with, you know,
everything is a set of five, it's like, well, how you would even feasibly do that.
But in this situation, is it better to stick with a set of five on a multi joint exercise or to do a
set of 10 on a single joint exercise?
I would feel it's probably better to go to that set of 10 with a single joint, no?
I, I honestly, I think this is a practical consideration.
I mean, this is almost certainly people who are just maxing machines out.
I don't think that this is decision that was made for any physiological.
No, but but in the sense that if he if he kept with the bench and did another set of five on the
bench compared to going to the fly and doing a set of 10, because people might look at that and be
like, well that set of 10 was.
No 10 you should.
No 10 is 10 is 10 is 10 is not.
Ten is still inside the range of repetitions.
It causes increases in recruitment after training.
So this is the thing that you need to do.
You need to look at what, what, what, what is the, what is the date that we have available that
tells us what's happening.
If I can do a set of 10 and that increases motion recruitment levels as an adaption, that tells me
my recruitment levels are pretty high at the end of the set.
So I think that 10 is fine.
Really it's creeping up towards 1512 to 15 is where you start to lose the ability to trigger the
adaption in recruitment after training, and that's where you've got other sensations going on to
such a high degree that you're not really capable of reaching Max recruitment at task failure.
That would be different if you were doing maximum velocity Concentrix, no?
Yeah.
But then you trigger recruitment increases on the first Rep so OK.
Is anything else to say on that day the.
Triceps, yeah.
So we've argued about the curve variations and I would probably probably have a similar argument
about the kind of triceps kind of exercises.
I'd be like, what are we doing that's really that different?
I mean, there are some differences there.
I think that we can see if the French press is behind the neck and then yeah, maybe you're getting
some more medial and natural triceps.
There probably is a standing push down maybe more long head.
So yeah, that's not that's not as bad I think as the as the, as the two Calvary concepts.
Yeah, you know, yeah.
It is funny though because obviously they they must know I assume, and not just John McCallum, but
other people who who wrote plans in a similar format must have had some idea of what they're doing
by doing the multi joint into the single joint near the bench into the fly.
But then when they get to a single joint.
Muscle, they don't switch to unilateral, Yeah.
They didn't follow the thought pattern.
Yeah, exactly.
So they got stumped.
So they they haven't really sort of logically thought about what it is that they were programming,
even though they kind of knew what they were doing.
Yeah.
So, but in terms of in terms of exercise selection overall, you know, there's definitely some
smaller gaps.
I mean, I said for the first workout that I thought the major omission was the frontal plane pulling
exercise.
But I could have easily also argued that the hamstrings isn't really fully kind of trained by just
doing in a stiff like deadlift.
I mean which?
Again, would be difficult with the.
Equipment.
It's the equipment availability as regards the second day, the, the, you know, when we're, the
approach that's been taken to training the PECS, for example, is very like we're just going to train
everything with one exercise or one plane of motion.
You know, you, they could have gone down a route of doing a little bit of variety there.
But again, is that equipment related?
Because you could train more clavicular PEC by doing some more close grip stuff.
But then you'd be like, well, OK, but how do I balance that out with more sternal and cost or pay?
And then you need some cables to play around with.
And if that's not available, which it may not have been, then you're kind of a bit stuck.
So you kind of see where they end up because you kind of eliminate all the other possibilities you.
Could even run into some issues there with the shoulder work and the other day as well then, because
presumably this bench is probably done with a fairly wide grip, so limiting for most people the
amount of shoulder involvement and had they done, you know, a closer grip, incline, whatever, then
maybe you drown into some issues.
Yeah.
So you know, again, like with Silver air programs, you can kind of when you start sort of removing
the things that we would choose because the equipment isn't available, then you kind of start to
understand how they put the routine together the way they did and why they did it.
And then as I say, as we've been talking about, when you start to identify some of the approaches
that they're taking with a heavy multi joint followed by the slightly lighter sort of single joint,
then, you know, there's some really interesting stuff here and it's really well put together.
It's just a few exercise selection omissions, a couple of areas here and there that I think the
volume is a bit toppy, you know, and you know, then really just like something that we've seen many
times before.
I don't know if you highlighted as you went through, but with the car phrase exercise, they're doing
5 sets of 30, which is a little bit strange because but you know, something that we see a lot, you
know, in other programs, people just seem to do high reps.
In almost all the plans, I, I barely recall, I think maybe Mensa was the only plan we've looked at
where there's lower repetitions for cars.
And you know, he was less limited by equipment at that point.
And I was actually looking at 1 of Reg parks bodybuilding courses today and it was all sets of five.
And in cars were I think sets of 25 or 30.
And the instruction was get your, your training partner to jump on your back and you do your sets of
25.
And I just, it'd be so hard to convince me otherwise that this is not just purely down to, again,
accessibility.
You know what they've got access to having body weights.
You know someone on your back you can't do.
How could you possibly do a set of five weighted calf phrases back then?
Yeah.
No, it's, it's, it's definitely indicative of a practical limitation.
But I just want to highlight why a kind of 30 Rep set is still feasible.
I think volume of five sets of that is too high because I think as you do more high Rep stuff, you
have to dial back the number of sets.
But then you know, OK, maybe calves can recover slightly better, but.
Again, if they were limited, if they can't add more weight than what they can add, right?
If they can add the weight of your training partner and that's it.
At a certain point that 30 isn't a Max set of 30.
So it suggested that reducing the time between sets so that hopefully by the time you get to set 5.
Yeah.
So it's not really wants it to failure, he probably only wants it to failure at the very end.
Yeah, I can see that.
Just to be clear for people who are kind of saying, well, you know, how do, how do different Rep
ranges work?
Because I've seen this question a few times and I just want to use the opportunity to answer it.
Basically when we are doing a set to failure, then multiple fatigue mechanisms are working.
Now if we have a load or a muscle force which is at least 30% of our maximum force or 30% of more at
Max, which kind of 30 Rep Max is going to be in that zone, generally a little bit more than that.
So that's enough to be at that threshold.
So you're creating at least that level of whole muscle force, then the whole muscle force.
Now, we're not talking about single fiber tension here, not talking about mechanical tension.
We're talking about whole muscle force.
The whole muscle force is enough to squeeze the veins closed while you're doing the concentric
contraction.
So you get what's called vascular occlusion and that traps blood inside the muscle if you drop below
that force level.
So if you like doing 100 Rep sets to failure, then you drop below that by quite a long way actually.
And as a result, each muscular contraction in the concentric phase is no longer occluding the blood
flow.
So blood flow comes straight out of the muscle in the concentric phase.
That's the difference between kind of the 30% tomorrow Max and below.
So that's why when you look at, and this is a conversation I actually had with Stuart Phillips
probably about 20 years ago now, the interesting thing is that and he pointed out to me, he made the
very kind of the very valid point long term.
And he said to me, we, we're choosing these percentages of one rate Max when we use 30% of 1 rate
Max in our training studies that he was doing with light loads versus moderate loads.
We're choosing them because it allows occlusion of blood flow.
We're deliberately choosing that because we know that that happens.
And that's really, really important because if you drop below that level of whole muscle force,
blood doesn't occlude.
In vascular occlusion doesn't happen.
Blood doesn't stay in the muscle.
Blood flow strokes, blood comes straight out and takes all the metabolites with it.
So the fundamental difference between a something like a 30 Rep Max set and 100 Max set is that you
get metabolite accumulation happening in your 30 Rep Max, but you don't get it happening in your
hundred Rep Max, and that changes the way that the muscle fibers experience the end of the set.
So if you're slowing to muscular failure in a in a 30 Rep set and you're slowing to muscular failure
in 100 Rep set, the slowing to failure in the in the 30 Rep set is happening in large part because
of the metabolite accumulation, which doesn't negatively affect mechanical tension.
Metabolites permit cross bridges to form, they just slow the formation rate down.
In contrast, if I if I get to muscular failure with 100 red back set, I cannot I cannot do that
because of metabolites and I have to do it locally because of calcium ion relativity.
Calcium ion stop cottage bridges from happening.
That stops mechanical tension, that stops you from actually triggering hypertrophy.
So This is why when Brad Schoenfeld did his really famously, I don't think he was the lead author.
I apologise to the fact that I can't remember the lead author's name, but he was involved in this
study where they compared I think it was 4 different loads and essentially every single load apart
from the load that went below 30% to what makes I think they had 40% and 20 percent, 40% and 60% and
8% all created exactly the same hypertrophy. 20% creates pretty much none in comparison.
And the reason for that is because you're actually not getting mechanical tension on the muss virus,
that muscular failure in that story because calcium amrite fatigue, your only available local
fatigue mechanism, metabolites obviously aren't there because they can't be trapped.
So fundamentally it's really important when you look at these kind of programs and you see sets of
like 30 reps, you're like, OK, not ideal, not perfect like we would describe, but fundamentally
possible when you look at the program.
And I see and I, we were arguing a little bit about this before we got on the podcast today.
And I was saying, and you were saying to me, well, nobody trained like this.
And I'm like, well, I actually do see powerlifting programs where people do these back off sets of
hundreds of reps of, you know, kind of elastic band press downs after they've done their bench
pressing workouts.
I'm like, that is not doing anything.
Now I can argue in a separate maybe on the high performance, the Physiology podcaster can argue
about why that doesn't do anything for tendons or ligaments or anything like that.
But for here it's not doing anything vibratory because it can't, you know, it can't actually allow
mechanical tension to be experienced by the working fibres that muscular failure because you haven't
got any metabolites.
And obviously spiral and and superspinal CNS fatigue levels are going to be high in in that very
high Rep set as well.
So do you.
Know just I'm just contrasting the two local fatigue mechanism groups here.
Yeah, yeah.
No, I was purely just thinking from a damage perspective it'd be interesting Like a set of 30 to
failure compared to a set because a set of 30, Obviously a set of 100 is going to have more spinal
CNS fatigue and super spinal CNS fatigue than a set of 30.
DNS fatigue's just increased.
I mean, like people I think don't appreciate because they've been brainwashed by fitness influences
over the decades shouting that, you know, heavy loads fry your CNS or whatever nonsense.
They're talking about fatigue.
Physiologists know without a shadow of a doubt that increasing excise duration is associated with
increasing central nervous system fatigue, proportion of the total fatigue.
So like if you look at long distance kind of aerobic exercise, 80% plus of the total fatigue that
they're experiencing is in the CNS, you know, and the opposite, it's like the exact opposite of what
you get in string training.
So how would the muscle damage from a set of say 100 compared to the muscle damage from a set of,
say, 30?
Honestly, I think it would be greater.
How much greater is difficult to take because as you rightly point out, the CNST mechanisms are
starting to stop you from really applying so much calcium and accumulation to the fibres that you're
working.
But equally, you've got no metabolites to help you either.
So I, I think it, you know, it might be twice as bad.
I don't know.
I, I think it is meaningfully worse.
I mean the, the, the Farrow study, I believe the name is Farrow, the lead author where they
compared, they actually compared quite high reps with even higher reps and the higher reps was
really, really quite a lot worse in terms of post workout fatigue.
So I think that will be the study.
I forget the exact details of the numbers of reps they used, but that would be the place I would
start with.
So I think, I think, yeah, I think it does create a meaningfully worse effect in terms of like
calcium I made fatigue and post workout fatigue, but the exact ratio I don't really have a handle
on.
So this plan twice a week and he was doing, you know, five well, well even what 8 sets per muscle,
but obviously some of those sets will lower repetitions in some way potentially.
Yeah, the way that you're modelling it makes it doable.
I do because five sets for me is the upper limit on training a muscle root twice a week.
Five sets per workout, to be clear.
Now theoretically, he could have done single sets and that still would have worked.
It still would have produced hypertrophy, no?
Hypertrophy across the week, yeah.
Yeah, even in some of the ex or some of the muscles that were being trained with just a single
exercise, it still would have been enough, let alone the ones where he's using two exercises.
So I suspect this is one reason why it's easy enough to find plans when we go back to the silver and
early golden era where people were training a muscle twice a week or even training full body twice a
week.
But I'd I simply cannot find plans where they were training at least full body once a week because
it did become so much more challenging.
So let's talk about that.
Why is it so much more challenging to write an effective program once a week than even just twice a
week?
So essentially when we talk about hypertrophy measured or hypertrophy stimulus or the hypertrophy
magnitude that we experience across A7 day period a week, then what we're what we're saying is that
there are going to be some stimuli during the week of whatever workouts we're doing.
And then when we leave the period of time in which we are processing that stimulus, which I call the
hypertrophy stimulus period because I'm not good at making up names, But basically you kind of have
a period of time that you're processing the hyper stimulus.
So you trigger it in a workout and then you process it afterwards and then you leave that period of
time.
Now muscle fibers are always either growing or shrinking.
There's no such thing as a muscle fiber just sitting in stasis, you know, because that would require
it to have some kind of molecular clock that waits kind of a period of time before it starts out
tripping.
I mean, that's just nonsense.
It doesn't happen.
So the fibre experiences stimulus and it grows while it's experiencing that stimulus.
And sorry, it grows for a period of time after it has experienced that stimulus.
And when it's finished growing, it then is like waiting for the next stimulus.
And while it's doing that, it's starting to shrink and that's really, you know, kind of how fibres
operate.
So if you've kind of got to say A2 day period of time, which is the kind of standard number of days
that most researchers are working with when they're thinking about this, I'm not going to argue the
exact period of time.
And basically you've got a maybe a 48 hour window after your work out when you experience that
stimulus.
Then if you go another five days, if you're talking about a whole week period, go another five days
without any training stimulus, then you're actually losing muscle fibre size in that five day
period.
And we can see that really clearly from a group of studies called the maintenance literature.
Go to look at the maintenance literature, what you'll find, there's a whole bunch of studies and
most of them have used either 3 or 4 sets, single workouts each week.
And you essentially don't experience any growth net across the training program.
And some of those training programs have been six months long.
So people have done six months of training and they've done three such months per week or four such
months per week.
And at the end of the six month period, they've no bigger than they were at the beginning.
And that's telling us that the sort of amount of growth that is experienced by each individual
workout is lost in the following five day period before the next workout.
That's just how it works.
There's no real way to argue against that because somebody would go, oh, well, three sets, you know,
in a workout isn't enough to stimulate hypertrophy.
I'm like, well, it is because I can actually do single sets twice a week and get hypertrophy showing
that.
So that's nonsense.
So the, the, the only way to explain the maintenance studies is to assume that you're getting
atrophy inside each training week that equals the three set hypertrophy that you get or four set
hypertrophy you get on one day.
I've never seen anybody really criticize those studies and I've never seen anybody come up with an
alternative explanation for them.
And So what you get is the Internet simply ignoring them.
And so people just simply don't talk about it because the only explanation is the one that I'm
giving.
So that gives us a really clear picture of how that is then working over, you know, each training
week.
The other side of that is then, OK, well, that is telling us that if we want to do a training
program in which we're only training a muscle once per week, we're actually only doing one gym visit
once per week, which is the introduction that we gave, you know, the start.
Then actually you have to do probably at least four, if not five sets.
Per muscle fibre that you're interested in training.
And that's where it gets really annoying because you're like, well if I've got to do 5 sets of the
exact same exercise.
Or you know, maybe you could argue that you could use the same kind of technique that we've been
describing in this programme and programme as well where you could do 1 multi joint exercise and
then essentially an identical single joint exercise afterwards.
But then you'd lose the benefits of the other muscles that the multi joint exercise with training,
you actually start with five sets per exercise and not many people want to do more than probably 20
sets total per workout.
I mean, that's topi.
I mean, I've had people get really aggravated with me when I've said 20 sets is doable and I don't
like doing.
I think 12 is much more sensible place to kind of pitch myself.
But people can go up 20 and you've got people doing 20 in your groups.
So it's totally doable, but that's only four exercises.
So the limitation.
So this is really the two sides of the problem.
The one side of the problem is that we've got, you know, this atrophy happening, which means you've
got to push workout volumes really high.
And the implication of that is that then we're limited in the number of exercises that we can do.
And so we end up being very constrained in terms of the type of program that will actually work or
the type of exercise workout that actually work in the context of that type of program.
So you've landed on five sets because some of the maintenance literature show that four sets was
maintenance.
So some of it did show that that three sets was maintenance.
So you could argue at four sets maybe you're going to get net hypertrophy, maybe you won't.
So you're saying, hey, let's go with five sets because we're fairly confident that that's going to
give you net hypertrophy?
Exactly.
So like that's why in my weekly net stimulus model, I say to people, you can either choose 3 as your
assumption for maintenance or 4 as your assumption for maintenance, whichever 1 you think is more
likely, but you can't choose anything less than that.
So you can't say 2 is maintenance because it's not.
Now, how much do you think there's individual variance in that?
You know, we've talked about, you know, the effect of, of dieting and stress on muscle protein
breakdown.
Presumably that would come into play to an extent.
So this is a huge count of worms, but basically we, we did a, we did an episode and this is me
remembering something that we talked about.
And I'd like to have this put on my record.
Actually, I've remembered something that we talked about.
I actually had people commenting on the fact that I'm starting to forget stuff a lot now.
But I remember that we talked about how muscle fibre atrophy works and whether it differs between
type 2 and type 1 muscle fibres.
And I explained that if you look at the literature, there's some really good data suggesting that
the only thing that affects the rate of atrophy of a muscle fibre is it's starting size, not whether
it's a fast twitch or a slow twitch fibre.
So arguably we would find that the more advanced somebody gets, the faster they are going to
experience atrophy within a training week.
So I would say that you're more likely to see higher maintenance volumes being required in more
advanced.
So I don't actually like the word advanced.
I don't like the phrase advanced lifter.
I prefer to talk about muscles being well developed.
I made this point loads of times before and people just ignore me because they want to call
themselves advanced or intermediate, whatever they want to label to describe themselves.
I'm like, you can't really do that.
Like, no, my lats are definitely in the category of advanced a muscle group by anybody's kind of
standards who, you know, isn't using anabolics.
But my calves are absolutely not.
They're really, really not.
So, you know, it's, it's like muscles are advanced or intermediate or it just depends on the state
that they're in, the proximity to their maximum capable growth in a natural state.
So yeah, I think really it's like how fast you like to see atrophy in these muscle fibres.
Well, how big are they?
If they're really big, then you can see faster atrophy.
I mean, like I'm, I'm going to put some data together to show to illustrate this point.
Again, I've made this point many times before, but people still seem to think that the more advanced
they get, the longer they can hang on to muscle for.
And it's exactly the opposite.
Rates of atrophy are always faster in the immediate termination point of a training program.
You can look at this in the, the training literature, you can see this happening.
There's a exponential decay of, of muscle mass immediately after stopping the, the training program.
And then you start to see a slow down of the loss later on.
You can see this in the atrophy literature.
So some really nice data showing that you do a couple of weeks of aerialisation or, or bed rest or
whatever, and almost all of the losses happened in the first week.
So people who, I mean this, this goes back to the influencers who, you know, kind of they stare at
the camera really intensely and say, you know, muscle loss happens really, really slowly.
And like, no, it doesn't happens really quickly.
So, and almost all of that loss is going to happen in the first kind of couple of days and, and
weeks of stopping whatever it was you're doing that was creating the growth in the 1st place.
So I think that you're going to see an effect whereby the more advanced the muscle is, the faster
their rate of battery is going to be.
So yeah, I would say that if anything, a once per week program is going to be probably impossible
for a advanced lifter to make progress on, advanced lifter an advanced muscle to make progress on,
whereas an intermediate or a beginner is probably going to be OK to make that work.
So we've landed on needing probably 5 sets per muscle.
And I think you made the point that you could follow a similar format to what we've talked about
today where you had multiple exercises and you're doing fewer sets and whatever.
Again, you're going to lose.
You're going to lose the ability to then grow the the kind of the other muscles that aren't worked
by the single joint exercise.
Exactly.
So you would need more total sets.
And also, I mean, this for me would be 1 situation where I would prefer to just do more sets of the
same exercise because in this situation, efficiency is going to be so important.
Yeah.
And even this small amount of time it might take to set up a new exercise, it's just not going to be
worth it in my opinion when we are talking 2030 sets that's required in this single workout.
Yeah, so interestingly, when I I have this question on Instagram basically and I, I tagged you
because I was like, I think we should answer this.
You'd already got an answer prepared that was, but I'd by the time I saw your story with the answer
and I'd already kind of presented my kind of solution, and the solution was basically almost
identical to yours with one tiny difference.
So I said basically a press, you know, I didn't specify because I think everyone's got their own
preferences, a pull.
And again, I didn't specify, but for me that would probably be a shallow incline bench press,
probably scapular plane.
And then just just for comfort really, because if I'm doing 5 sets, I don't really want to have
something uncomfortable.
And then I'd probably do a frontal plane kind of pull down.
That would be probably my personal preferences.
And then, and that's not just preferences regarding comfort, I guess that's also some preferences
regarding aesthetics.
So I would probably prefer to have a press that was more dealt focused rather than PEC focus, just
personal aesthetic preferences.
And then in terms of lower body, I'd had leg press and a stiff leg deadlift and I was like, that
feels to me like it gets as much coverage as I can possibly get a lower body without spending hours
doing, you know, kind of set up for squats and things like that.
People who find stiff legs a lot take a long time to set up for fine, then you know, they could do
something else.
But I've never really found stiff legs to take a huge amount of time to set up for.
So that that would be my set of preferences.
And the stiff leg gets me, you know, kind of a little bit of sort of stabiliser muscles all over the
place, plus obviously the hamstrings, maybe some of the Doctor Magnus glutes as well.
Maybe I'm crossing over a little bit between the leg press and the stiff leg there.
Maybe that's not ideal, but you know, that was kind of my solution.
So describe your solution to us.
Well, my solution was effectively the same as yours, but I'd selected a leg curl.
See the leg curl instead of the stiff leg deadlift I think.
I can't remember now if I gave a leg press or a squat.
I think perhaps I gave a hack squat.
I think you had a hack squat instead of a leg press.
And I think yeah, which is interesting to say.
You're kind of yeah, that that is.
Kind of did the opposite in a sense with your lower body, no?
So yeah, I mean, this probably deserves a little bit more time than we're going to give it, but the
differences between a hack squat and a leg press are probably a little bit more subtle than we're
giving them credit for.
But there's definitely something interesting that's going on there.
If people want to do a kind of biomechanical analysis and tell us what they think, they're welcome
to, but I think that's not something I've seen a lot of data on, so it's difficult to be too
precise.
But I think yeah, you're probably, yeah, going down the route of less extraneous muscles, aren't
you, with your hex squat and your leg?
They're quite targeted in comparison.
In comparison to your your stiff leg deadlift, Yeah.
And I mean for me, the reason I didn't go with this stiff leg deadlift is purely set up time.
And yeah, so you know, if by the time you're doing, if you have, I guess it does come down to the
strength of the lifter.
If someone just needs one plate, it's quick to set up.
It's easy if someones using more weight which arguably not many advanced lifters or.
People with advanced and.
Things we'll be doing.
Yeah, I don't know.
I mean, I've just always found stiff legs to be fairly comfortable.
And so I've never really, it's like I used to take 2025 minutes to get to a point where I could
squat.
That for me was the one that just chewed up time at the gym where a stiff leg I can walk across to a
Barber and just grip and RIP.
And it just feels so come I'm just, I'm a built deadlifter rather than a squatter.
So it just, it feels very comfortable for me to do that.
Especially stiff leg where it's just pure hip hinge, which is what I, my, I am, whatever it is the
word.
I mean, as I get older, I forget words, I forget everything.
Yeah, just the way that my, my, my bio mechanics works.
So yeah, maybe other people would find that would take too long to to set up for so.
I do, yeah.
I do think that it comes down to the individual.
So the, for what it's worth, the plan that you saw of mine, that was the one in my group for
beginners.
And I also don't particularly do much stiff leg or rack pulling with beginners.
I'll do some hip hinging, but but a stiff leg deadly.
So I would normally wait until someone's maybe a little bit more intermediate.
So that's partly why I chose an exercise selection.
But I did think about it then from a.
So I've got like an intermediate version of this sort of template as well.
And that's where I was trying to target a little bit more of some of the, I guess the two joint
muscles that will be missing in in a abbreviated plan like what we've talked about just now.
That's that's where I think we need to go with this next to help people understand that this is,
even though this is a solution, it is a long way away from being a ideal way of training because
you're missing a lot by doing this.
I mean, this is really bare bones stuff.
I mean, this is really, really bare bones because if you could literally go, as I made this point on
my stories, if you could literally go from, you know, doing that programme once per week to doing a
workout twice per week, you could drop everything down to single sets.
Yes, exactly exactly.
And that's the point I was making.
The start of every 5.
Days.
If you even if you could train every five days, you could do one or two sets.
One set probably going to be maintenance.
Arguably 2 sets is going to be neck growth noise.
So you could literally more than half the volume and get some.
Suddenly, suddenly you can now do your kind of single joint stuff.
You can do your rec fem work, you can do, you know, kind of a couple of different exercise for
pressors and pulls.
You can do some direct arm work and do some glute work and do some calf razors.
Suddenly you've got the ability to now do full on full body a, you know, twice a week.
And the program is now awesome because long term you're going to make great growth across the whole
body.
This program that we're describing here is like survival level strength training.
It's like is the absolute bare minimum just for like anything.
It's like this is just going to get you like from zero to 1 if you like.
Yeah, Yeah, it's not.
I've said this before, I maintain having like training, it'd be 5 days, it'd be four or five days is
such a hack for if you're travelling.
If like if there's something come up where you just can't get into the gym more regularly, The
difference that couple of days makes compared to once a week, which would just make your life so
much easier in what that plan in the gym can actually look like.
Like I, I, you know, I think people are too wed to the idea of a calendar week or I need to do 2
sessions a week or how many sessions a week don't.
Know it's well to be to be fair the context that this was argued to me and or asked of me is
definitely something that people are going to be wed to a calendar week because.
Yeah, if it's work related, sure, but if it's travelling, that's my my recommendation to clients who
are travelling is always can you get to the gym every five days?
Yeah.
That's, that's, that's about the, that's a valid 1.
I think if people are travelling, then it's like just look in your calendar and try and find a place
every every five days.
That makes a lot more sense.
And also that has the benefit that they can keep their existing exercise selection.
So just, this is an important point.
So there's two contexts where this question can come up.
In the first context, the one that I've seen it in recently, which is what we're responding to
today, is this is somebody who's like this is the format of my life for the next, you know, couple
of months or even a year or whatever.
So I need a program that I can kind of work with for that entire period of time.
OK, fine.
Well, then there's no point in putting extra exercises in from time to time because whatever you get
from those extra exercises is just going to go away.
In contrast, the context that you just raised is different because somebody will have been maybe
doing some kind of program with a lot more exercises in, and whether that's full body A or whether
it's full body AB doesn't really matter.
The point is that they are getting some benefit or have had some benefit from all of those exercises
and they've kept it for some period of time.
Now they go in gym.
If you were to go from that I've programmed to this, what we've talked about today with just four
exercises, that would be a big down step from anything you've been doing previously because you
would now lose any fibre growth that you've had in the fibres you're now not training.
So specifically stuff like rec fem, you know, kind of maybe some gastro work, you know, long head of
the triceps and various bits and pieces that maybe you're not training very effectively.
In contrast, if you literally do that five every five day workout, you can just go to your program
as it stands.
You can pick out every single exercise that you're doing and try and do as much of those in a single
session with single sets.
And that's it.
That's the way you would approach that problem, I think.
Yeah, yeah, exactly right.
If you're doing an AB full body each workouts, 6 exercises, maybe you're doing 2 sets of each.
Well, then you would just combine them and then you'd do a single set, 12 exercises and maybe 5
days.
Now let's say that first scenario.
So this is, this is your life.
You're not, you're not doing a normal plan outside of this.
This is the plan you're following.
If someone wanted to maybe target more of their body than what we've just outlined with those four
exercises or I guess just, yeah, I guess in that sense, like if I want to really make the most of
this possible once per week plan, are there any other creative ways you can think about doing this?
So there's a couple of came to mind for me.
And one, what you're sort of smirking a little bit.
What are you laughing at?
Yeah, I mean this my my brain just goes, what?
Why would I want?
Why would I want to think about that?
Well, one I thought of was clusters.
So if we're saying you need about 5 sets of stimulating or five, yeah, five sets of stimulus, let's
say, then you could achieve that doing cluster sets.
And So what we could equate that maybe to?
About when you think, yeah, I think that practically you would end up in a similar place in terms of
time, effort and set up if you went down the cluster route to if you just did five sets of moderate
loads to failure.
So if you, if you go in the gym and you do 5 sets of eight to 10 to failure with a couple of minutes
rest, I think that to do that same volume stimulating reps with clusters, I think you would probably
have to use heavy loads.
Because if you don't use heavy loads with clusters, you burn an enormous amount of time getting the
fatigue necessary to get into stimulatory zone.
And that means you're now going to have to warm up to the point where you're doing fibre at maxes
with stuff like hack squat and leg press and stiff leg deadlift and stuff like that.
And that's, that's, that's territory that's going to take you time to get to.
So I think you're going to end up in more or less the same place with those two things.
But I agree with you, it's totally doable.
I just not sure it's better.
I think for upper body, I think it it could be potential a little bit more viable.
I agree.
If you're doing a leg press, a hack squat, something like that, it's it's probably not going to.
I mean, even for me personally, I actually quite like doing it for Pendulum Squad, but I can see
what you're saying.
But if you're doing something like a a shoulder press machine or something like that, it's arguably
going to be two sets to warm up.
No, I probably made that happen.
Yeah.
I don't think it will save you stacks of time, but I do wonder whether, given the volume of that
workout, whether that would maybe help mitigate some of the Super spinal CNS fatigue, Maybe just
make the work as a whole a little bit more effective.
Yeah.
Although again, the exercises that you would need it in in order to see that meaningful reduction in
super spinal CST would be the lower body ones because they're the ones that.
Yeah, true.
Create more of the kind of cardiovascular sensation so.
Well, in in the plan that I gave.
So if I so I would do that with a lying leg curl, then if I was going to do this classes, I wouldn't
do it with a sated leg curl.
But, you know, if it was a lying leg curl, I would say a pendulum squat and overhead trust machine.
It would be a good back exercise to do it on.
Even a lat pull down honestly works pretty well.
And I know you're not a fan of classes on that.
Yeah.
Well, it's just like be like, you know, how would I, how would I do that?
I'm just like, I'm kind of the machine I've got in the gym at the moment.
I'm maxing it out doing eights so.
With one in frontal plane, yeah.
So, OK, so maybe, maybe it's not going to work for you.
I think, I think that's the issue that we've got with a lot of machine exercises, you know, and
I've, I've, I've seen this with power lifters before.
They've said to me they just Max out the, the pulling machines in the gym, but a long, a long, long
way.
So I think that's, that's just how it is.
But yeah, we, we are talking about intermediate level lifter here.
So you know, it probably isn't an issue May.
Not be the same issue, yeah.
Now the other way that I would program this and and what I have done in in my group is try to do
exercises at the same station and there's always going to be a bit of a trade off.
Yeah.
So, you know, obviously in this example of training once a week, there's going to be some
limitations or some sort of, I guess compromises we're going to need to make.
But if I was trying to maximize kind of total muscular jar could actually train in that session.
For me personally, I would probably describe a bench now and some dumbbells.
I'd spend a lot of time just at a bench with dumbbells and that way at least we can get some.
Triceps, long head work in, we can get some direct arm work in.
We can do a chest exercise there.
We can do back exercise.
OK, lower body, probably not so much, but we can actually even do more like a kind of antagonist
sort of circuit where you could do a, we could do a family.
Then you could go to a bent over row.
You could then go to a triceps extension, go to a curl, go back to your fly exercise, give it 4560
seconds between sets, and that might be a way that you can just make it a little bit more time
efficient.
Yes, none of those exercises are going to be perfect, but it's going to allow it to at least get a
little bit more masculine in that one session.
Yeah, I mean, for me, that would probably push me to the point I wouldn't probably be able to do all
of that in in one, in one session.
That'd probably be too many sets for me.
But.
Yeah, I mean that would be that would probably be 6 if we're doing full upper body if we get direct
arm work in and we've got a 2 lower body.
But you know someone might say maybe a higher price for them is lower body.
So then it's.
It's 30 sets in a worker that's it's not going to happen for.
Me you never had your your Poliquin days I've got I remember doing blade.
Never, never.
Never.
Never.
Never.
Never.
Never.
Or grungy days.
I I, I, you know, as I said, The thing is I started out my interest in this whole kind of strength
training thing started out with very much a strength focus.
I wanted to, you know, kind of get really high weight pull up and dip numbers.
I wanted to get one arm chins.
I want.
That was kind of what I got into as a starting point and I kind of graduated get into a more
bodybuilding mentality.
I wouldn't say I've ever been a bodybuilder by any means, but just didn't more of a bodybuilding
mentality as I kind of stopped aiming for specific numbers, goals, you know, and just wanted to
train for the sake of training and health and all the rest of it.
So never really gone down that body route.
So when I was doing weighted punch tips, I was just doing two or three workouts a week with maybe
sort of three sets per kind of workout for each muscle group meet exercise.
And they're probably doing between 2:00 and 4:00 repetitions each time with the Rep in reserves,
something like that.
So I've never really kind of been in that zone.
It's never something that's been part of my life.
Very different experience.
See what brought me to this space?
Yeah, Yeah.
In total, some of my workouts used to be like a Grunda workout.
You know, we'd be doing 4 or 6 exercises, eight sets of each exercise.
You know, 50 sets of workout.
Was not.
Yeah.
Well, effectively it was.
Yeah.
OK.
Any, any other creative ways you can think about tackling this?
I mean bearing in mind someone may not be limited by duration in that single session, you know, it
may simply be how I can only get to a gym once a week, but when I'm there it's been 2 hours.
OK, well then then what you would do is something that you've pointed out before, which is you'd
have an intra workout break and go and get some orange juice and come back.
And even if you did and I even if you did nothing other than that.
So you did the 1st 2 like you do your upper body workout and then or whatever and then you went for
a walk, had a refuel and came back an hour later or whatever and did the other half.
Even if you just did that didn't change anything else.
I think that would still get you a higher quality workout because your motivation levels would be so
much higher.
Your you'd have no superspinal CNST present because you'd have given yourself a chance to clear all
the kind of metabolites out your system and you'd be able to do a far more stimulating job for the
lower body.
So but yeah, then then I can see a scenario where you might be able to do like maybe a single joint
exercise at the end of your.
So maybe you could throw some curls in after your body and maybe you could throw some car phrases in
after your and maybe that could get you to the 30.
Well, that would be an interesting way.
You do an up lowest split, right?
So you do.
You're basically.
Doing an intraday up lowest split.
Exactly, exactly.
And then you could push it.
Maybe someone can go to the gym twice on that day.
Maybe they do an AM session and a PM session like we've talked about in the past.
And I think you'd probably get the same kind of this sort of structure there.
You throw in some single joint stuff at the end of each kind.
Of the limitation is you still need those five sets, so you're still going to be limited to what,
maybe four or five exercises per like 4 or 5 upper, four or five lower.
How the users you can go well off the end of life.
Betty 20 sets.
You.
You.
I thought you gave us 20 sets a moment ago.
You're.
Going to you're now trying to do 2 of those in the same day.
I mean, I think a more reasonable solution would be to do 3 exercises per session.
And even that third exercise I would want to be a single joint one.
I think that unless you're, unless you're really kind of saying, Oh no, the gym is literally like
not very far away.
It's just that, you know, and so I can go there first thing in the morning and then I can spend the
whole day doing something else and I can go there last thing at night.
You're, I think you're now pushing the boundaries of this, of this constraints of this system.
But in that extreme case where somebody can go to the gym like on one day a week, but they can go
once in the very first thing in the morning, that's almost going twice a week now really because
you're, you're pushing those to like 12 hours apart, you're almost saying that you're going twice a
week at that point, I think you're.
Pushing I think a lot of people, I think there's there's probably a lot of younger people who are
listening to this would be like, you know what I could I could easily do four sets of five.
Give it a few hours to.
Be young.
Wow, that's a long.
Time come back, I'm I can still remember it.
I'm like, I don't think I would do it.
The world was a different place when I was that age, Yeah.
So yeah, but you start pushing the constraints of this problem to squeaking point and OK, fine,
maybe, you know, you're basically doing 2 separate workouts, one in the very early morning, one in
the evening then yeah.
But honestly, that's almost like training twice a week.
And I don't think that's really the problem that we're.
Well, we've given the whole continuum here.
We've given right from just four exercises, five sets starting one session, yeah, yeah, to having a
little intermission, to doing a bit more of a maximus approach within that single session, to
splitting it up more fully and and bookending the day with two sessions.
And I think, you know, if somebody's stuck in this situation, you would potentially have people on
all ends of that continue whether like, you know what?
I actually want to do everything I can to maximize this one day a week.
But I think the, the, the most feasible options are either going to be just going to the gym and
doing the whole thing in one go, or they're going to be what you've pointed out before, which is do
your first two or three.
If you want to kind of do that single joint one, go and get a break, have a snack or some orange
juice, have a walk around, chill, come back an hour later and do the other half.
I I actually think if if people do genuinely have a whole afternoon free once a week when that that
to me feels like it hits the sweet spot much better than than the idea of trying to do 2 workouts 2
sessions.
And you know, the the variant of that, which surprisingly, I've actually had a number of people tell
me this is what they do, is they may have some equipment at home.
And obviously they don't have a full gym, but they may have a squat rack or they may have dumbbells
or whatever it is.
And they're like, hey, here's these one or two exercises I can really easily do effectively at home.
And all these other exercises I can't.
So for them, it might be OK, you go to the gym and you do your four exercises at the gym and then
you have that one.
Maybe you've got the squat rack, and then maybe you do squats in the evening at home.
Or whatever pull up bar, yeah.
Or pull up exactly, right, exactly.
I think that is a.
If you've got the means of making that work, I think that's a really interesting way of doing it as
well.
Yeah, yeah.
I think.
But I think that hopefully is enough to answer the question that we've been posed.
I mean, I think that's a really solid set of answers, to be honest.
Yeah, I think there's plenty of options there.
Or one could throw in some physiological drop sets and do it in.
I don't know.
I don't know how I would make that work.
It would, yeah.
How would you quantify that?
I don't think it would work very well, would it?
It wouldn't be my first choice, No, I think you.
Could conclude your set your.
I honestly, I think, I think that I think that given the mental demand that you're placing yourself
under to do all of this, I think it helps to simplify other aspects of the programme as much as
possible.
A vanilla A vanilla workout plan is is.
Probably the best way to go.
OK.
Anything else you can think of that's worth mentioning when it comes to training once a week?
No, I think we've shoehorned everything in there that we can possibly think of.
I've got one last one for you.
A question people do come up with is, but what if I do posing?
Will that help you maintain what I got in that session midweek posing?
Depends on how much of A Co contraction you're getting.
I mean Co contractions, if they're done with Max effort, they will essentially function like
isometric contractions.
You're just providing antagonist muscles as resistance to agonist muscles.
So it's basically the same as doing isometrics, which as we know from a lot of exercise Physiology
studies, produces pretty meaningful hypertrophy.
So it depends on exactly what kind of level of effort you're putting into the muscular contraction
that's involved in the posing.
Yeah.
So basically, yes it could work, but it comes down to you and yours exactly.
How you're doing it?
Yeah.
Yeah, yeah.
Fair.
OK.
Thank you and thank you for everyone to who listened.
And if you have thought of a better way to do a one time per week program, then please let us know
because I do think some of these questions do help us think creatively.
And I think that that's the exciting part in some of this is sometimes there might be stuff we can
look at and think, hey, you know what?
That's the way of thinking outside the box.
So if you've done that, by all means, shoot us, message, let us know.
And until next time, I yeah, I hope you guys have fun experimenting and let us know what you come up
with.