Episode: 006 Strength - the mechanisms that increase strength, and why hypertrophy must make us stronger
URL: https://open.spotify.com/episode/3M7loWXijNBCJ1gWZhlbi1
Published: 2025-06-29
================================================================================

And welcome back everyone to another episode of Hypertrophy past and present.
And as always, today we've got a new topic for you and we've got a new workout plan for you.
And hopefully we've got an interesting conversation for you all.
Now, just before we jump into it, I do want to say I've had a few people asking if the captions are
available for our podcast.
And they're all available.
They're all on YouTube.
So if you're one of the people from one of 100 different countries of people who listen to us then
and English is your second language, you can hop on YouTube and find the captions there.
It'll make it a little bit easier.
Anyway, Welcome to the show, Chris.
How are you today?
I'm doing very well.
Thanks, Jake.
Obviously about to go traveling, so a little bit of upheaval, but ready to talk about this new
routine today.
You're about to go traveling and I'm currently doing a mini travel.
You are.
So we're going to be swapping roles in a few weeks.
So today we have what I think is a nice plan following on from last week's episode.
So if you guys missed last week's episode, we were looking at 1 of Reg Park's plans.
And Reg Park was the first bodybuilder to lift to bench 500 lbs, which is a pretty phenomenal
effort.
And something that maybe people don't necessarily know or realize is that some of these bodybuilds
are mostly these bodybuilds in the silver era.
Not only were they the biggest people on the planet, they were also the strongest people on the
planet.
So Ridge Park, second person ever to bench £500.
Today we're going to talk about the third person to bench 500 lbs Marvin ETA and some of the
strength feats of these bodybuilders in the silver era were just phenomenal.
And, you know, they were not only were they performing these strength feats and and, you know, doing
shows with these strength feats and obviously bodybuilding came out of a lot of these sort of
strongman kind of events in the in the drones era, but they were even competing at very high levels,
like at in Olympics.
So for example, John Gimmick was competing in the Olympics for weightlifting.
So these people undoubtedly were phenomenally strong.
So Marvin ETA, who we're going to be talking about one of his plans today.
He and you know, obviously we're talking sort of 1950s.
So maybe there's been some embellishment.
I know you and I were having a bit of a discussion about this yesterday.
So take with a grain of salt.
There is photographic evidence, but obviously photos can be stage whatever else.
But supposedly Marvin ETA was, like I said, the third person to bench 500 lbs and he actually did a
515 LB bench.
And that one I think is fairly well, fairly credible because it was many spectators who witnessed
that.
But supposedly he's been credited with doing 12 single arm chin UPS and also doing 197K dip, which
is that's 197 kilos attached to his body.
So this is the the weight of two large men.
And in the photo, those two large men who have wrapped around his waist as he was performing a dip.
Now I know you're dying to make a comment, so.
Not really.
I just, I think that there are, you know, there are lifts where you can kind of get your head around
them and say, OK, no, I understand that.
And then there are lifts where you kind of go, no, I, I just can't, I would have to see that being
done to actually believe it.
And I think that that dip for me, as somebody who has spent many years getting their dip to a level
that other people find quite frightening, you know, I've had people literally stare at me in gyms
when I've been doing dips with one and a quarter body weight hanging off my waist.
You know, to see somebody doing with 2 1/2 times body weight hanging off their waist, that's like
double what I could do, which is, I mean, and I'm not saying that I'm anything special.
I'm just saying that I was, I took a lift to a relatively like extreme obsessive point and to the
point where people were like, yeah, that's, that's, that's heavy.
And then have somebody double that.
You know, for me that's, that's just a little bit tricky for me to get my head around now.
Next step?
Wait, like how much weight?
About 85, but that was that was like, you know, probably managed to get sort of a double with that.
Really it was a very clean single and there was there was capacity and I was weighing a just over
7072 something like that.
That was and that's that that was tough, you know, and I was doing one on chins at the same time.
So I can kind of like, for me, that's, that's ballpark, you know, when somebody comes along and
they're like, OK, And just another comment on that.
When I was doing those lifts, my, my, my overall physique looked more like a climber than like a
bodybuilder.
So I was very, very lean, very, very kind of thin.
If you like really you wouldn't have noticed that I was, you know, lifting weights when I had
clothes on.
It's just you don't see it because you need to keep your body weight quite low when you're doing
those kind of well, you don't need to, but it helps a lot.
If you look at the picture of Marvin EDA doing that dip with the two guys hanging off him, he looks
like a bodybuilder.
He looked massive.
I think again, the context, it's like we you shared some photos of the guy who's currently got the
world record in the dip, which is not which.
I think is is worth noting, yeah.
So his dip is I believe is about one 95194 kilos, something along those lines.
So it's very close to the.
A couple kilos in it, yeah.
His physique looks nothing like Marvin Ida's does so.
He's much lighter as well.
He'd be about 20 kilos lighter.
Basically, like if I kind of look to him now, he looks like a much more muscular version of what I
look like when I was doing sort of silly dips and and and one oranges in the past, which is what I
would expect.
It looks like a bigger version of a climber really, whereas either looked like a bodybuilder who
just was doing so for me.
The two.
I mean, I'm not trying to hijack this podcast and start debating whether because it's not the point,
it's not the point.
Clearly, clearly, Marvin E that enormous dip strength.
And the point I'm making is when you've done a lift to a point where you know it really, really well
and you've got to a high level in that lift, then when when somebody comes along and claims that
they've doubled it, you kind of go, I know what that would take.
And I, there are discrepancies between what I would expect to see and what I'm seeing.
And therefore I'm just going to withhold judgement on that because unless I saw it happen, I would
be really straining my brain to understand how it happened.
I'm not saying it didn't happen, I believe it's probably slightly exaggerated.
I think that's fair.
If if their metric for measuring the weight of the dip was literally the body weight of these two
people, then I think it would be easy enough to be like, yeah, I weigh this much like on a good day.
So I can see that there's probably a few 5 kilos or.
So I mean, so, but the point, the point is clearly it was an enormous dip strength.
Clearly he was enormously strong, you know, and you know, that's kind of the point of using this guy
as the marker, the the kind of example routine of a strength routine in this particular context.
So, yeah, I don't want to derail this stuff.
I'm just, you know, for me it was just an unusual situation because most of the time we talk about
people's deadlift strength or squat strength or, and I'm like, I'm not an aficionado of those lifts.
I don't know those lifts intimately.
I know how to do one on chins.
I know how to do, you know, weighted polyps and weighted dips to a point that most people will not
get to unless they develop a unhealthy obsession with it like I did, you know, And so when I see
somebody in the past having a benchmark number in those categories I become interested in, I'm like,
I can comment on that because it's something I know about.
It's very rare for me to be in that situation.
Most of the time I'm coming Physiology like I know that very, very well, but this is one of those
very rare situations where I actually do know about the practicalities of a lift.
For what it's worth, I think it's interesting to note that the current world record holder who is
sitting at one 94195 kilos, whatever it was, he was also a record holding his body weight.
His previous lift was 140 kilos.
So he's actually upped the record by 50 odd kilos in it was only a a matter of one or two years.
So that might actually tie into what we're going to discuss later today.
Now moving on from dips, let's talk about the plan.
So this was so Marvin ETA obviously very strong guy, no doubt about that.
Whether he did the 197K dip or not, he's definitely strong.
Now this was a plan that he, he and he put forward in the early 50s and he wrote about in a, in a
magazine and he coined this or talked about this as a power mass routine.
So he was a big advocate, obviously, for gaining strength and gaining mass.
And they, you know, use terminology like like bulking or, or, or, you know, massing or mass routines
here.
So this is kind of the, the premise of this type of plan was one that was going to get, make someone
gain strength as well as gain large amounts of muscle.
Now, obviously we've noted that he was a, he had multiple, you know, high level lifts, not just a
dip, but also the bench, also the chin up and elsewhere he talks about specializing in those
particular lifts and, and how he would do that.
And you know, how one might, for example, choose specific exercises around a particular lift, But
this is just an example of a power mask routine.
So here we have what I might do actually is, is go through the exercises and then I'll go circle
back around to how he structured the sets and reps because it's quite different to what we've seen
so far.
So as far as exercise selection, as is generally or was generally the case, he was using a full body
plan and he started with the squat.
He then went into bench.
He then suggested going to a bent over barbell row and he used a closer to mid grip here, not a wide
grip like we've seen in the past.
And then went to a, into a standing overhead press where he was again using a relatively sort of mid
grip and then a wide pronated grip lat pull down, which I'm sure you'll be happy to see.
And then he concluded with dumbbell curls.
Now the set of Rep structure for this program actually changed.
He used a, a form of periodization here.
And for the first two weeks, he did three sets of eight.
Now, just as I read this out for you guys who listened to our episode last week, keep this in mind
or keep those sort of sets that we talked about in terms of recoverable volume in mind as we talk
about the sets here.
So he did three sets of eight for the first two weeks.
He then moved into four sets of 6 for two weeks and then he suggested having a lighter week.
Now he didn't, as you know, was generally the case with a lot of these guys.
He didn't go into a lot of specificity over what that looked like, but it was some form of of a
deload.
He then suggested going into five sets of five and pushing up to 7, so 5 by 5 to 7 for a month.
And then for the final month he did three lots of triples and also did three sets of 6.
So he sort of combined the lower grips with the the moderate reps and he did that the month and then
I suppose he sort of rinse and repeated now there's a fair bit there.
What are your initial thoughts?
Various things, as you say, it's really interesting to see somebody who obviously developed their
back strength to the point where they could do one on chin UPS was focusing on wide grip pull ups,
which I think is important because it does give you a lot more back or lat development thing in
terms of the lower and middle and lower regions rather than just focusing on the upper region, which
would get from a sagittal plane, narrow grip movement.
That's interesting.
Straightaway.
It's interesting that we've got this periodization appearing very clearly, perhaps the first time
we've talked about that on this podcast.
But really the highlight is the point that you've already made, which is that if you look at the Rep
ranges here, so if we're training three times a week, three sets, three times a week for moderate
loads, 8 reps, that's exactly what we've been seeing in the recoverability data that, you know,
we've been talking about forever.
If we drop down to a heavier Rep range, sixes suddenly or fives even, you can do an extra couple of
sets.
Well, again, that's what we talked about last week.
So it's really, really cool.
A visualization example of this need to stay within the recoverable volume zone.
And really, you know, that's the backdrop for a lot of the controversy that we're seeing at the
moment and not going into this and derailing the podcast yet again.
But that's the backdrop again for this debate that we're seeing at the moment where people were
saying, no, you can do a zillion sets a week and carry on getting stronger and, and bigger.
And it's like, well, hang on a minute, how come every single bodybuilder pre steroids didn't do
that?
And they actually nail the numbers that we're seeing in the Physiology and the recoverability data
today.
How come they actually nailed those numbers perfectly, Literally three sets of moderate lows, 3 * a
week.
That's literally exactly what the Physiology data says today and the recoverability data say today.
So how come they were doing that, you know, like, and everybody prior to that, you know, was
training with lower volumes and and higher frequencies as well.
So it's really, really important I think to emphasize that observation that you you've made, which
is that the Rep ranges and the, you know, the volumes with those Rep ranges in the context of the
three times a week frequency stack up perfectly with what we've been saying and what's.
So, well, it's so interesting, isn't it?
Like you just go back and listen to last week and it's remarkable.
Exactly.
And then I guess really it's interesting that he's focusing on a small number of exercises similar
to Ridge Park, I guess focusing on a small number of exercises rather than taking that bodybuilding
approach of, you know, having a larger number of exercises and covering kind of larger amount of the
body.
It's, you know, clearly he had a very dedicated strength focus, which is, you know, kind of why
we're using that as an example this time.
Yeah, yeah.
And for a little bit more context than Marvin ETA, so he did not compete for very long.
He was sort of, there's a bit of politics happening at the time that he was competing and he
competed for York and then he kind of got banned from competing with the Weedah sanctioned events.
And so he didn't, he wasn't a competitive bodybuilder for very long and his feats were more strength
based feats.
So that might also inform some of the exercise selection we're seeing here.
And I didn't note this, but he had a, I don't know if it was a record overhead press, but was
certainly close to it.
But I don't recall exactly how much load it was.
So you know, obviously we see both the bench and overhead press in here and it was obviously a very
renowned lifter for both of those.
Any other comments on either the exercise selection or anything else you see outline wise?
No.
I mean, I think this is one of those routines that we will probably come back to as a comparison as
we keep doing these, you know, kind of discoveries each week and look at more and more routines.
I think we'll come back to this and go.
Do you remember when we talked about Marvin EDD and he had that feature of his routine?
Because you know, there's some interesting stuff here, especially around that periodization model.
You know, I think a lot of the time I tend to just reject periodization because physiologically
there's very little going on, if anything.
But maybe there's something like I always say, you know, I don't like to simply reject information
out of hand and go, that's irrelevant.
I'm just going to ignore it.
I don't do that.
I just kind of like put it in a drawer and leave it and remember that it's there.
And then like, if I then see something later on and come back to it and say, what does that now fit
with?
The information that we've already seen is as we go through these routines week on week, will there
be a moment in the future when we have some more periodization information or something else that
triggers us to come back and look at this and go, actually that now fits with why they were doing
that?
And maybe that explains this.
And you start to build up a picture of what's going on.
Ultimately, you can't really build a picture without all of these little pieces of information.
The fact that I can't say anything incisive about this right now doesn't mean that we won't be able
to use that usefully in the future is the point that I'm making.
So that's the best I can do, right?
Which is generally the story of my life when it comes to these silver routines where I see them the
first time.
And I think, oh, that's interesting.
That doesn't necessarily make sense to me or or even more to the point, I might just gloss over
something and then six months later they'd be like, holy moly, they were doing what?
And then it starts to fit based on something else that we discover nowadays.
So we could probably will make comments on this again in the future.
There was one thing I was going to mention and it's escaping me now.
I'm sure it'll come back to me, but I do want to.
So I mentioned obviously the the current world record holder for the dip and I do want to
potentially use that maybe as a segue into what we're going to talk.
But how is it possible that someone who's a very advanced lifter could, could potentially add 10:20,
30-40 kilos to a very advanced lift at late stages in the career?
That is unbelievable.
And even Marvin EDA, I should say, he for his body weight, he was the first person I believe to
bench 400 lbs.
And then within a matter of of one to two years, he was then benching 515, which is just
unbelievable increases in load.
Well, basically there would be two ways that that would happen.
Either it would be a complete radical change in the technique of the exercise.
And you do see that from time to time in athletic situations where somebody changes.
I mean, there's some very famous examples, but you know, somebody changes the way they're doing
something and then suddenly the performance of that event just jumps up a notch.
The problem is that when you see that happening, what you what you should notice is that everybody
within a couple of years adopts that new way of doing it.
And then everybody's now like 20 percent, 30% better if that doesn't happen.
And generally speaking, in a context of a strength sport, the only way you're going to do that is
move up away class.
There's the that's.
Very interesting in the context of bench.
At this point in time bench records are dropping like nothing else, so that is interesting.
I do wonder what had shifted around the early 1950s where we do see people adding 50 to 100 lbs on
top bench presses in only a year or two.
So maybe that's my.
Obviously Marvin ETA was a renowned people talk about his dip strength as being the kind of the
marker of his kind of achievements.
And so perhaps that tricep strength and the change from a bench press which perhaps was wider to one
that was slightly narrow.
Again, I'm speaking as someone who does not know the bench press intimately like I do with the
lifts, but you know, that's potentially one of the factors.
That and that could be it because he does talk about, in contrast to someone like Greg Park, Greg
was very big on very wide gripping bench and he would often talk about any of these, these pressing
movements used as wider grip essentially as possible.
And Marvin it is, he does talk about using him a much more narrow grip, not not super narrow, but he
does use more mid grip.
So he's going to get a bit more triceps involvement there.
So that may well be part of it.
So I think this is a great opportunity to just cover like we covered fatigue in previous episodes
and tried to encapsulate that in a short period of time, like to just encapsulate how strength gains
work.
And then there's a corollary of that.
Just describe how hypertrophy contributes to strength gains really.
So just trying to get our hands around this or arms around this subject very quickly.
When we talk about strength and strength increases, we're talking about an outcome that we're
measuring externally.
So in the same way, when we talked about fatigue mechanisms and fatigue, I said fatigue itself is
the measurable temporary reduction in strength or exercise performance.
It's not a physiological mechanism itself.
It is an outcome that we measure externally when we look beneath that and go, OK, well what's making
that happen?
Why am I noticing these changes in strength as a result of doing a couple of sets of strength
training exercise?
Well, mechanistically, these are the things that are changing and that's what make that's what makes
the kind of reduction in strength or reduction in performance occur.
The same thing happens with strength gains.
So if I look at a 2-3 month strength training program and I notice that somebody's increased their
one Rep Max bench press or whatever by this percentage, that's a strength increase.
That strength increase is not itself a physiological thing.
We are not like I often say in my mentorship course, we're not computer sprites where you can say
I've got 76 points of strength and I, you know, like, no, we don't work like that.
The strength is a measurement.
So people say I need to develop strength.
I'm like, well, no, you don't because you can't.
The strength is the outcome measurement.
What you're trying to develop is an increase perhaps in a strength mechanism or an adaption.
And that leads us then to analyze, well, what are the strength mechanisms?
And so like there's six that I talk about regularly.
You know, you can add an extra 1 on there just for completeness.
And then maybe there's a couple that we can mention that are potentially discussed but probably
don't contribute.
So very quickly, we've got three major neural mechanisms of strength gains, 3 adaptions that happen.
We've got improvements in coordination.
So we practice the lift and get better at it.
We've got increases in, oh, sorry, let me do them in the correct order.
We've got the improvements in coordination.
We've got reductions in antagonist characterization.
Now, the reason I like to place this next to improvements in coordination is because many people
group them together.
And that's totally valid.
You can do that if you want to do that.
So you can just say like it's another type of coordination because it really does work the same way.
You're just reducing, like for example, if you're doing curls and your biceps are doing the lift,
your triceps are actually getting in the way.
They are stabilizing a joint, but they're producing A braking force.
If you reduce the triceps activation, your curl strength will go up even though your biceps muscle
strength hasn't actually changed as a muscle force output.
So you've got this improvement in coordination, practicing the lift, you've got this antagonist Co
activation reduction, which is again kind of practicing the lift and making that adoption happen.
And then thirdly, your final major neural adoption that contributes to strength and these kind of
maximum strength kind of situations rather than speed situations is an increase in motor unit
recruitment.
So we're increasing the number of muscle fibers that you can actually activate.
And that's the first time you're really going to see the actual muscle increase in the force output.
The coordination and the correct evasion reductions are just efficiency modifiers.
You're just becoming more efficient to applying the muscle forces that you've got available to you
to make the external environment, you know, change.
And that just commenting back on what we just talked about, that's where I would say if you see a
whole generation of bench presses suddenly jump up by 25 percent, it's because of that, that
coordination, that Co activation side of things rather than probably because of anything else.
So those are our three kind of neural adaptations.
And then just kind of completing the picture, we've got stuff happening more peripherally.
Obviously we've got hypertrophy.
Now just a very quick note on terminology here.
When we say hypertrophy in the wider fitness industry and in the widest possible sense, you know, we
tend to just mean an increase in muscle mass.
Now technically hypertrophy actually only refers to an increase in the diameter of single muscle
fibers.
So, so if you really want to be complete here, you have to stuff hot sarcomarogenesis into this
category as well.
So sarcomarogenesis does, well, let me just kind of put them in the correct order.
Hypertrophy of muscle fibers, an increase in the number of myofibrils, an increase in the diameter
of the fiber that will increase muscle fiber force.
Now I'm going to come back to this point and talk through that in more detail momentarily, but I
just want to clarify that if you're adding more myofibrils inside the fiber, the fiber will get
stronger.
If you've got more fibers that are larger inside the muscle, you can create more of a muscle force
that then contributes to joint torque.
So it's very difficult to add myofibrils and not have that contribute to an increase in strength.
Sarcoma has had it or did the same thing.
Some people don't understand why that happens.
It's because of lateral force transmission, which I'll come.
So basically what we've got is an additional muscle size, either through hypertrophy in the
strictest sense of the term, which means an increase in the diameter of a survivor or due to the
addition of sarcomares in series, which increases the length of the muscle fiber.
The other two mechanisms peripherally and then going to be an increase in tendon stiffness.
Basically, the reason this works is because if you have a compliant tendon, when you pull the
muscle, when the muscle pulls on the on the tendon, if the tendon is compliant, it gives a little
bit and now the muscle shortens a little bit quicker than you're expecting it to.
As a result, it now works closer to the velocity end of the force velocity spectrum than it was
doing previously.
If the muscle, if the tendon does not move, then of course the muscle can now move more slowly and
that allows it to then produce a high force in accordance with the force velocity relationship.
That's a very small mechanism.
So if that doesn't make sense to you, it doesn't matter that much.
Just being complete here for a full analysis of the subject.
Finally, we've got this increase in what we call lateral force transmission.
Now this is the one that really I just need to walk through over the space of two minutes because
even though it's not enormously important, it does actually require us to understand what's going
on.
When we talk about muscle fibers, we talk about them essentially contracting and then transmitting
that force to the tendon.
How do they do do that?
Well, they don't do it the way that people think.
And this is really, really a big deal.
So we tend to think that the muscle fiber just pulls on the neighboring sarcomas along the chain.
So if you've got a muscle fiber made-up of sarcomas and essentially you're visualizing that with
each sarcomas pulling on the next one, pulling on the next one, pulling on the next one, all the way
down to the tendon, it doesn't work like that.
And the reason it doesn't work like that is because if it did, then the only force you would be able
to see at the end of the fiber where it pulls on the tendon will be a single sarcamas worth of
force.
That's how you know strings work.
If you pull on a string, the tension has to be identical at every single point.
So each sarcoma is going to have the same amount of force.
And in order to have each sarcoma contribute independently to the tendon, what happens is the
sarcoma actually pulls on the endometrium, which is the surrounding tube around the muscle fiber.
Now as real to doing that, each sarcoma can now act independently on the tenant and use some sarcoma
forces instead of having them essentially you know kind of be you know just one sarcomas worth of
force among the whole muscle fiber.
Now, as a result, if you add new, this is what I was saying about sarcoma Genesis, if you add new
sarcomas in series and they are clipped to the endometrium, they will contribute to additional force
of that muscle fiber because you're not, you're basically adding contractor units.
They're acting independently of each other.
So of course you add muscle force, muscle fiber force.
Can I give it a little analogy here on metaphor?
And it's not perfect, but it's what's coming to mind for me as you're speaking.
So imagine you've got, you're playing tug of war.
And what you're saying is if instead of each person having their hands on the rope, if you had maybe
one person had their hands on the rope and everyone else on their side was holding onto each other.
Like they're linking hands and they were all connected to each other and not to the rope, and only
one person's connected to the rope.
Then you're only essentially getting that one person's, you know, capacity of force.
If you had everybody LinkedIn a chain, you are limited by the weakest link in that chain as.
Opposed to everyone then places their hands on the rope and that's.
Some forces you do correct.
That's the only point I wanted to make and hopefully that's helpful.
That's very, very helpful.
I'm stealing that.
So yeah.
So basically lateral force transmission allows us to make sarcomary genesis work in an identical way
to hypertrophy itself.
Additionally, and this is the mechanism of lateral force transmission.
Uniquely, if you have a mossifier that does not have every single sarcomer attached to its and the
museum already, you can do an additional process where you can add new costumers which clip the
existing sarcamers into that and the museum.
And now you make the muscle fiber stronger.
And as a result, it contributes to an increase in the muscle fiber force even without adding new
contractile materials.
So lateral force transmission increases the strength of the fiber.
Importantly, it slows the muscle fiber shortening velocity down because if you have two unit
sarcomeres next to each other, then essentially if they don't have costumers in the intervening
section between the two sarcomeres, that double sarcomere which you've got basically will shorten
essentially twice as fast as two sarcomeres which are both clipped into the endometrium
independently.
As a result, if you go into a mussifier that has very few costumers and all of its sarcomeres are
kind of acting longitudinally rather than laterally, you have a very fast mussifier.
If you start adding costumers into that fibre, it will slow down dramatically.
It will increase its force production quite a lot, but it'll slow down dramatically.
You can therefore see what happens and the Robert Erskine studies have been brilliant at
illustrating this.
If you look at the way in which an increase in lateral force transmission contributes to increases
in strength, increases in power, increases in velocity.
Actually what you see is a increase in strength is quite substantial, either a no change in power or
slight decrease and a reduction in muscle fibre shortening velocity.
So you tilt the force velocity relationship of that or force velocity profile of that muscle fiber
quite dramatically as a result of that adaption.
So when people look at these sort of situations and they go, interestingly, I can increase lateral
force transmission and that changes the power output to the of the muscle fiber or the muscle or the
exercise that I'm doing.
Yes, it will do.
But you have to understand why that's happening.
The strength has actually gone up.
Power has either stayed the same or decreased slightly and muscle fiber shortening velocity has gone
down.
And that's because of the mechanism by which this adaption is actually happening.
So those are what I would describe as the six or maybe 7, depending on how you define hypertrophy as
being, whether it's just fibre hypertrophy plus sarcomere genesis, or just both at the same time.
You've got 3 mechanisms of neural adapt, 3, sorry, 3 neural adaptations, which are mechanisms of
strength gains.
You've got these three peripheral mechanisms.
Some people also talk about increases in muscle fibre.
Oh, sorry, increases in rate coding, which is an increase in the firing frequency of motives that
doesn't actually contribute to strength gains.
That's a a factor that contributes to an increase in speed.
We only really see that happening in fast movement situations.
We don't tend to see that happening at the low velocity end of the spectrum.
You could also for completeness say, well, what about increases in higher fibrillar density?
Well, yeah.
So this is a really interesting thing about sarcoplasmic hypertrophy.
I get a lot of questions about sarcoplasmic hypertrophy.
People say, can I make sarcoplasmic hypertrophy happen?
You know, is there a way of training for it?
At the moment, data is pretty limited.
Don't really know whether you can or can't.
There's some interesting mechanistic explanations and and you can go into that, but honestly, I
think it's pretty thin.
The thing that really kind of makes me sit up and take notice is that if you look across sectional
data, you tend to find that people who are in training a long time actually have higher microblog
density, as in less relative sarcoplasm to myofibrils than people who've been training for a short
period of time.
Honestly, what I think probably happens is you actually increase the density of myofibrils rather
than increasing the volume of sarcoposm relative to the microbes with increasing periods of
training.
How can you train for that?
I don't know.
I mean, again, thin data, not really sure what's going on, but I mentioned that as a possible, you
know, kind of contributed to strength gains over time, the muscle kind of maturity effect that some
people maybe talk about old man's strength.
You know, I don't know whether that is even a thing.
But anyway.
And then finally, you know, hyperplasia, does it happen?
Can it happen?
Yeah.
I mean, we're well into speculative territory here.
Again, I think it probably does happen if you push muscle fibers to the point where they start to
bump up against their their maximum possible diameter in accordance with the size principle, the
striated muscle.
But you know, like I keep saying to people, they say to me, well, what would happen if that
happened?
And I'm like, no, I'm not going to do that.
It's like, I'm not going to build a speculation on top of a speculation and then another speculation
on top of that.
And then before we know what we're talking about, it's like I'm living in a different universe when
none of this really applies anymore.
Like I'm happy to take my speculations one step further forwards on top of what the existing
literature supports.
I'm not going any further than that.
So yeah, maybe hyperplasia does happen a little bit.
And if it did, obviously it would contribute to a strength gain in the same way that hypertrophy and
sarcoplasmia, sorry, sarcamerogenesis does much more than that.
I'm not really going to say.
So that Hope for Thee has been a super quick summary of the mechanisms by which we can get stronger.
As I say, you can divide it into individual adaptations and you can then talk about, if you want to,
you can talk about how do you target each of those adaptations.
And just finishing up this little kind of sort of section that I've walked us through.
If you want to increase strength, you can't do that directly.
You have to do that through one of these mechanisms.
And this changes everything when you want to write to strength training program, because what you're
going to do now with this knowledge is you're going to look at your strength training program and
go, which part of my program is designed to improve coordination?
And with that most likely reductions in coactivation or which part of it, what are you actually
doing actively to make those things happen?
Are you practicing with intent to improve your coordination?
Are you using an external focus of attention, for example, very, very good way of improving
coordination?
Are you perhaps training in an unfatiguing state to make sure that you maximize the quality of your
movement and thereby allow yourself to gain those improvements in motor learning?
Are you improving motor unit recruitment or how are you doing that?
Are you seeking to maximize recruitment in the exercise that you're doing in order to make sure that
that, you know, adoption then happened?
When it comes to peripheral side, are you talking, I mean, most people are listening to this podcast
know exactly how to target hypertrophy and sogomeric Dennis in those things.
But you know, what are you doing to make those things happen?
And is it going to happen in a way that supports the strength goal that you have?
And of course, tendon stiffness, Are you making that happen?
Are you making sure the tendon is exposed to the heavy loading that triggers that adaption?
And are you triggering lateral force transmission increase as well?
Honestly, who knows what makes that adaption really happen, But it does seem to be associated with
heavier loading rather than lighter loading.
I wouldn't want to go much further down that road, to be honest.
But, you know, I think there's definitely like a suggestive data to suggest that that is the way.
So just kind of, yeah, finalizing this comment.
It's like when we're trying to make a strength gain happen, we are actually not trying to make the
strength and happen directly.
What we're trying to do is make an adaption happen.
And when you change your perspective and say, I'm not trying to increase strength, I'm trying to
increase this adaption.
The way you approach programming alters.
And that's why it's very, very difficult to answer questions when people say, you know, oh, you've,
you've explained how this, this, this hypertrophy works and you've got this model and it's really
simple.
And yeah, of course it is.
It's one thing like, and now you're asking me to model 6 or 7 things and you know, have a, the
system that you can't do that.
It's not a valid construct.
You can't have something like a weakness weekly net stimulus model for, for strength gains because
it's not a valid construct.
It's 577 or six or seven things.
And they all respond in different ways to different training variables.
So the way to construct a strength training program is many, many, many times more complicated than
constructing A hypertrophy training program because you're seeking multiple things happening
simultaneous.
Or, and maybe this is actually the key to understanding Marvin Eder's period disease approach.
Maybe he is training different things at different points.
Maybe he's going, you know, instinctively, not necessarily physiologically, cognitively, but
instinctively he's thinking, you know, I'm training this aspect of what makes up strength in this
period of time.
And then I'm moving.
I don't know, I'm just kind of thinking aloud here.
But you've got to be thinking in terms of different adaptations rather than, you know, strength as a
single thing.
Because it's not a single.
There's a lot I want to ask you around this now.
I'll try not to take down too many tangents, but for starters, just to reiterate, one important
thing you said is we're not talking about strength.
There's one thing, obviously we're talking about it as six or seven things.
And so you made this point, but in case anyone missed it, obviously you've talked about the week of
the net stimulus when it comes to hypertrophy and you've got this model that predicts based on
frequency, based on concession volume, based on you can sort of choose your own kind of stimulus
period and stuff like that.
You can predict what the hypertrophy stimulus over that week would be.
And you're saying people are asking me to do this for and you can't because strength is not one
thing.
So you might be able to do it for potentially for, I don't know, coordination or like one of these
things, but you can't do it for all six or seven things combined.
Now, that in and of itself is potentially new information to some people listening.
Some people listen to, you are probably thinking, hang on, I thought hypertrophy was one thing and
strength was another.
You're telling me strength kind of is this nebulous thing.
There's all these other things combined.
And yeah, that's exactly what you're saying.
Now, based on that, what I want to know is of those, let's say, 6:00-ish things, they're not well,
a, they're not all equally going to contribute to total strength gains, right?
So some of these are going to have a larger magnitude of effect than other things.
So I'm interested in a, which of the, the things which are going to have a bigger impact?
And I guess a part of that conversation, some of these things are kind of coming along for the ride,
like some of them we're going to do most likely by virtue of maybe chasing some of these other
adaptations.
So can you speak into those two things a little bit?
So what we tend to see, and this is one of the biggest problems with analysing strength gains, is
that the relative contributions of each of these adaptations changes according to the exercise that
you're doing or training trying to improve the strength of and the training status of the person
who's doing the training.
So to take an extreme example, if you pick a beginner and you ask them to stop training or
practicing a multi joint free weight exercise, you are going to see coordination improvements that
shock you.
You know, the strength gains will be extraordinary.
Like one of my favorite studies tried to, in a very simple way, get under the skin of how much
coordination contributes to strength gains.
And they actually picked a knee extension exercise because they wanted to limit the magnitude of the
effect.
We're like, we're going to pick something that we actually think requires almost no coordination at
all.
And they basically just had people do knee extension training, untrained people do knee extension
training.
And they basically compared the strength gains in that trained knee extension exercise in the gym
with a Dynam monitor knee extension that was matched as closely as possible to it.
Now, the dynamometer is an interesting situation because you strap people in for that exercise.
So there's no way you can really do anything other than just rotate the knee.
You can't do anything else.
There's no positioning yourself on the seat.
You can't, you know, stabilize yourself to a greater extent by holding the handles or anything like
that.
So all of that sort of extraneous stuff that you do when you're sitting on a knee extension machine
to position yourself and maximize your points, you can't do that in a dynamometer.
And the dynamometer, the strength gain was about half what you got from the knee extension in the
gym.
I'm like, that is incredible.
Like what you're telling me is that in a machine knee extension, a single joint machine exercise,
half the gains in strength in an untrained person over a couple of months training is actually
coordination.
Now extrapolate that to multi joint and then extrapolate it again to something like a, you know,
kind of free weight barbell exercise, like a squat or something like that.
And then extrapolate it against something like a one arm chin up.
And like the jumps in coordination are just absolutely are going to be enormous each time that you
do that.
So what I think is important to start with is that if you have a unstable or less stable exercise,
more difficult to coordinate exercise, something that requires a lot of skill, you are going to find
that coordination starts at at least half of your strength gains as a beginner and goes upwards from
there probably, you know, exponentially as you're working, working through that.
Now obviously once you've got a well trained, not trained, well practiced, because we're talking
about a skill here, Once you have somebody who's practiced that exercise for months, maybe even
longer, then of course the contributions of coordination drop off dramatically.
But just as a scale of things, I think what we're talking about is that if you're training beginners
in a strength training exercise, you're starting from it being half of your strength gains and going
upwards from there quite steeply, I think.
So this is the problem with strength gains in beginner our situations, because what you're going to
find is that coordination obliterates anything else that you're going to do.
And that's why when people go, why is this strength gain the same in this group that trained with
this proximity to failure and that prompts you wanted to fail, like because coordination obliterates
everything, absolutely obliterates everything.
You're looking at coordination improvements in beginner people as a contributor to strength gains.
It is going to be the lion's share of what you're doing.
That's just Axiomat.
This is why presumably back in the day people used, say, beginners, you would achieve all these
neural adaptations first and and hypertrophy came second.
You know, there used to be this sort of idea.
Not true because basically it's not, it's the coordination improvements come first.
So got some really nice data showing you can literally go in the gym and, you know, practice and
exercise for, you know, half an hour, come back the following day and your strength has just jumped
really, really high upwards from that first day, like 10s of percents upwards.
You know that is what's happening with the untrained population when they're exposed to an exercise
they've not done before.
Neural adaption as regards characterization reductions are very slow.
Neural adaptations regarding routine recruitment increases are delayed by a couple of weeks.
So what the what the hypertrophy researchers believed initially was that you got your neural
adoptions first and then hypertrophy came second?
Not actually true.
The coordination improvements happened 1st and then you start to see some hypertrophy and then you
start to see the increases in recruitment and then much later on you start to see the reductions in
calculation.
Now, strictly speaking, everything is happening more or less simultaneously.
I don't actually think the recruitment increases happen until the coordination is at the point where
you can actually devote all of your maximum tolerable obsession effort to recruit recruiting motor
units instead of, you know, kind of worrying about the fact the exercise is getting away from you
because it's difficult.
But ultimately, that's the kind of timelines we tend to see.
So coordination is the thing that's kind of dominates in that first kind of week or two of training.
But the point I'm making here is that that is why when people are confused by strength gains in
beginners and they're like, why is this weird?
Why are we seeing all of these strength training periods produce more or less the straight the same
strength gains regardless of what training variables we throw at them?
It's because coordination is getting in the way.
It's such, it's an enormous.
Fact.
And so then you've got someone who's a more advanced lifter and they've rehearsed some of these
lifts for potentially years.
Then at that point, what are going to be the the main contributors to increasing the strength level
on that lift?
Yeah.
So what we tend to see in the literature is that the coordination has this enormous increase in the
early weeks of practicing a new lift.
Neural adaptations wise, as I say, recruitment tends to be dominating in the next sort of three to
six months.
That tends to be the period of time in which most recruitment gains happen.
It does continue increasing after that, but much more slowly.
And technical activation takes a very, very long time to Max out like years.
So I think you know, when people say, Oh well, train lifters don't get neural adaptations, well,
yes, they do.
It's just predominantly a reduction in Co activation rather than anything else.
On the peripheral side, of course, you know, you've got the, you know, the hyper to the
psychomerogenesis.
Psychomerogenesis in a particular exercise is going to Max out within months.
So that again is not really going to be a trained lifter issue.
Tenon stiffness is a tricky one.
It probably scales with load on the bar.
So I think it's a lifetime adaption.
As long as load carries on increasing, you're going to see Tenon stiffness changes.
Lateral forced emission probably does cap out at a certain point because you can't add customers to
a fibre.
If it's full of customers, the places for adding customers don't exist.
So you're not going to get any more of that.
So all we tend to see then is you can create a scenario or you can create an imaginary model where
you go, well, what is going to be like?
Take the opposite example of what we talked about earlier.
If we have a very well trained bodybuilder who's been doing the extensions for you know, three years
plus, what's going to contribute to an increase in then the extension from week to week?
Well, there's not really much that can contribute in that scenario apart from hypertrophy that just
isn't.
And that's why when, you know, you talk to lifters who've been training many, many, many years and
they're improving the extension strength or, you know, kind of lateral race strength on a machine or
something very stable, where they're not really going to see a coordination change or anything like
that.
They're talking like it takes them three or four weeks to add a Rep.
Well, yeah, because the only thing that can contribute in that situation is the hypertrophy.
And I think that's why when in the past I've talked about using progressive overload as a marker for
making, you know, being confident that you're adding muscle size over time.
It's in that context.
It's in the context of me talking to somebody who's got multiple years of training behind them and
they've got exercises that they've practiced that are very stable, and they're doing a, you know,
very consistent routine week on week on week, and they're taking a couple of weeks to add
repetitions.
I'm expecting that hypertrophy is the primary contributor to strength gains in that situation.
You mentioned a latcher Gray.
So I've been training now for coming on close to two decades.
And throughout the whole time I would have been doing latcher raises.
And I did a video on this not too long ago where I was using a new latcher raise machine, obviously
as a very stable exercise.
And there's not a whole lot of variation in that type of exercise.
And just using this new machine, I was adding about one new plate every single week for probably
about a maybe not quite a month, but several weeks, yeah.
It's really, really difficult to, you know, unless you go looking for this stuff, you don't realise
it's happening.
It's like, but yeah, absolutely.
You go and you, you sit yourself down on a new machine and you're like, oh, wow, this is amazing.
It's like, it's so much fun because yeah, the ways of just this is going up and up and up.
I mean, like this is coordination.
I'm, I'm getting myself used to this new situation.
And then suddenly you just hit a wall with it and it's like, no, you can't do that anymore.
And then you go find a new machine.
You go find a new machine to play around on.
Yeah, but that's the point It's like like what are we really doing this for?
Are we are we doing this as entertainment or are we doing this As for the purpose of increasing
muscle size?
And the problem is that if coordination is I mean, just kind of jumping back from this and talking
about hypertrophy training for a moment because we're trying to talk about strength gains here very,
very quickly and I know we're rushing through this, but we have limited time to do this.
But just briefly talking about hypertrophy for a moment, if our purpose is to maximize muscle
growth, we don't want a situation where coordination is a limiter.
Because if your brain is devoting effort to the cognitive process of coordinating the movement for
you because you can't do it instinctively, you are not able to maximize motor unit equipment.
That's not going to happen.
We actually want to get very quickly to the point where this very rapid strength gain isn't
happening.
So if we take a step back and go, Oh yes, we accept that it's fun to see these numbers jumping
upwards over week on week on week, but actually it's bad because it's tells us that we're not
actually maxing recruitment out in that period of time.
We want to be in a situation that actually nobody wants to be in, which is the grinding bit where
you basically weak and weak and weak, just hitting the same numbers and you're like, is this ever
going to increase in the repetitions?
Then finally you see the number go up on repetitioning.
Like, fantastic, OK.
Well, that's, that's exactly the point I wanted to make and I wanted to actually go down that path a
little bit further because I think it's an important point for people who do obviously want to focus
on hypertrophy.
The point I was making is I'm a fairly advanced lift and I was still seeing that.
So how long do we think some of these coordination improvements, even in these stable exercises, how
long is 1 likely to actually experience this, this big chunk of coordination improvement occurring
for like presumably we're going to see that for weeks, what maybe up to a month or so.
What would you anticipate?
It's absolutely a non linear relationship.
So you go in and you start practicing the exercise.
What's, and, and just again, clarifying for people so they understand motor learning is a, is a
instant spontaneous learning process.
So if you start practicing, your brain is instantaneously in that moment upgrading your software.
If you like to make you better at that thing, there isn't, you don't need to go home and sleep on
it.
The brain is doing it instantaneously.
So if you sit down on the machine and you do a couple of repetitions and you do them, you know, with
the goal of improving your movement quality, you will instantaneously improve that.
If you then walk around the gym a bit, come back, you should now be stronger.
With you see this, if there's, if you're a lifter who's done an exercise in the past and then you
haven't done it for a month and you come back to doing that exercise your first set, you'll be
significantly weaker.
You come back and do a second set and you'll be significantly strong in that second set.
Your brain, just like the, the process of how the brain stores and retrieves information is
obviously still pretty opaque to us.
But my mental model for how it works is just that the information, it never goes anywhere.
You actually store everything.
It just becomes a little bit harder to retrieve it if you bury it under other stuff.
And I'm not saying that's exactly what happens.
It just, for me, that mental model works really, really well because if you think of it in that
term, it's like, yes, I did this particular overhead press.
Well, this lateral race machine, you know, six months ago and I was down in a different city.
And now I come back and I sit down at the first time and it doesn't seem to work.
And then as you say, you walk around the gym, you come back and immediately it's like it's better
again.
Now that that learning process is way too fast to be a true new learning process.
It's like the brain's just figured out where it's stored, that information, it's now retrieved it
again, and now you're doing it the way that you were doing it before.
So this like coordination never goes anywhere.
It just gets buried under other stuff.
Neuroscientists can tell me that I'm talking rubbish, but the the model for me actually works pretty
well for as far as I want to use it.
So basically, yeah, we we kind of want to avoid that situation as far as possible, but it is a thing
that does carry on happening Now non linear, non linear changes are very noticeable.
So we see these huge improvements when we start practicing a new machine, and we start to see slower
and slower improvements on top of that, and it starts to plateau, but it never really really fully
plateaus.
So you just end up with this very, very, very slowly ascending line that just carries on going up
forever.
And ultimately, it's just because the brain is always collecting information.
And if it notices that you've just randomly done something that was even fractionally superior to
what it was doing the previous time, it just upgrades its model.
And yeah, those upgrades are tiny, but they are still there.
So coordination is one of those things that just carries on happening.
It just happens less quickly the further down the road.
But there's still a threshold at some point where once you get to that point, they can start to see
more increases in things like molding in recruitment, right?
So because it's the perception what we're dealing, what we don't want is like we don't want a
situation in which we perceive that the exercise is requiring cognitive resources from us to
control.
You're basically looking for a scenario where you're instinctively controlling the weight without
having to devote your a conscious mind.
Almost a point where it feels like second nature to do that movement.
Yeah.
So it's, yeah, the threshold we're looking for is the point at which the exercise doesn't really
require any cognitive resources, because then you're devoting all cognitive resources to effort.
Ultimately.
This is why, you know, we point people towards more stable stuff and easier stuff because you just
kind of get to that threshold much more quickly.
You can get to that threshold with more complicated exercises, it just requires a lot more months of
practice.
So from a practical standpoint or application standpoint, So what we've just so there's, it takes a
while to get to this point where you're coordinated enough that you're going to see these other
adaptations take place a bit more quickly.
Now that means that there has to be enough rehearsing of that particular movement that takes place.
So when I see people program and they, they program an exercise, say once per week, just from a
coordination standpoint, what that's going to do is, is slow down that timeline or you know, stretch
out that timeline of achieving those coordination improvements, right?
Like if you're doing an exercise once per week compared to doing it two or three times per week,
then obviously it's going to take you longer to get to that said point.
Yeah, exactly.
And if you'll forgive me, I'm just going to expand this point and hijack it very, very slightly to
link back to something that I mentioned earlier, which is that I can't build a weekly net stimulus
model for strength gains because it's strength isn't a valid construct in the way that hypertrophy
is a single construct.
The coordination improvements that we are trying to achieve in this situation have a completely
different profile across the week from something like hypertrophy.
So when we talk about hypertrophy, we have this like stimulus period.
We have an atrophy thing going on.
We have the stimulus that we can achieve that's nonlinear in the workout.
OK, great.
We understand that.
We put that together in a model and we end up with the weakly next stimulus model.
Coordination basically will improve if you show the brain a better way of doing what you're doing
than you're already doing.
That's it.
It's literally that's the only thing that matters if you if you perform the movement and the brain
notices because it has an effort perception sensor built into it, which we all know.
So we have an effort perception sensor, your brain does the movement.
If your brain notices that, that's interesting.
What you just did was less effortful than what you previously did.
So I'm going to upgrade what you previously did with this new mode program.
We're going to do that one going forward.
That that's kind of how coordination improvements work.
So on that basis, if you can do like that every 10 minutes every day forever, then you'll just carry
on improving coordination forever.
And actually, if you look at sports like snooker or you know, sort of other like darts, for example,
like where there's no fatigue really, then you can practice those for hours and hours and hours and
hours every single day and just carry on getting better because there's no limiter.
Because fatigue is the thing that really breaks down movement patterns and starts to stop us from
actually upgrading the ones that we've got because it makes the ones that we're doing now worse than
the one the brain has stored.
So it just doesn't upgrade anything.
So you can basically see situations where like coordination follows an absolutely completely
different pattern.
You can just go in the gym and practice the left.
And if you don't create so much fatigue that your next lift and suffers, so you just do singles with
several reps in reserve and you just keep doing those, you're just going to count getting better.
And there's nothing that's going to stop that from happening as long as fatigue isn't there because
it's an instantaneous upgrade process.
So you can't map that on top of the hypertrophy net stimulus model.
You can't map those two things because they're absolutely completely incompatible.
And like people say to me, well, how can I program for strength gains like you can't.
You can improve coordination as a goal.
You can improve recruitment as a goal, you can improve muscle size as a goal.
So all of these different things are different goals and ultimately they're not going to sit in the
same model.
It just cannot work.
And I guess I'm getting a little bit kind of emphatic about this because I just received so many
questions of people saying please build a strength model and like you don't understand what it is
you're asking me to do.
It's actually impossible.
I'm not saying that because I'm trying to make it sound difficult.
It's not difficult.
It's impossible.
The two things are different.
So ultimately, coordination is a really amazing way to illustrate that because you can literally
just improve indefinitely as long as you don't interfere with the movement program.
Sorry, the quality of the motor program that you're actually engaging in and fatigue is the primary
reason why that's going to happen.
It makes things quite murky because when you were saying that it made me think, well, the classic
piece of advice is someone's plateaued on a lift.
What What do people say to do?
You take that lift and you put a first and a workout.
OK, I understand the now training that in an unfatigue state.
And so the idea is that there potentially is, you know, more modular recruitment going to that
exercise.
But what you said there's, well, actually you're training it in an unfatigue state.
So now you might actually see more coordination improvements as well.
So when we're talking about progressive overload, it actually gets very murky as to what is it
that's causing that progressive overload.
We can't separate it out into is it just hypertrophy or is it these other adaptations?
Absolutely.
I mean, the main reason and I ask people to put the lift first is because you're more likely to, to
higher level of motor unit recruitment if you put it first.
So you're going to get access to more muscle fibers and you might even see an increase in
recruitment.
So that again is, as you say, murky.
It's the problem.
The problem is you're doing multiple things at the same time.
You're improving the chances of coordination gains, you're improving the chances of recruitment
gains, you're improving the chances of hypertroy because of those recruitment increases and the
improve in the gains in recruitment.
It's like all of these things are happening simultaneously and sometimes they they are moving in the
same direction as each other.
And so you can say, OK, well then that that's all good.
But actually sometimes they're going up in the directions from each other like we were just talking
about a moment ago.
Coordination and hypertrophy being completely and utterly different strategies for making those two
sets of adaptations happen.
So again, like strength gains is not a vanilla.
It is a extremely complicated problem.
And the only way you're going to make sense of it is to break it down into its component
adaptations.
Pick an adaption or multiple adaptations that you think are most valuable to chase after.
Chase after those and make them happen and then pick something else.
And again, this maybe This is why periodization is useful practically for making a strength training
period and work because you pick something to work on and you work on that, and then you pick
something else to work on and you work on that.
And then maybe that allows you to make maximum progress over time.
I'm sure there's going to be a lot of additional questions as to, you know, how to how to focus on
those particular adaptations and maybe that could be something we do in a future episode.
But the last question I have for you is I touched on kind of the murkiness with progressive overload
and obviously with these adaptations, some of these do not or are not tied to hypertrophy.
And then obviously hypertrophy is tied or is one of these adaptations that leads to an increase in
strength.
Can we just go down that path for a moment longer?
Because that seems to be a bit of a misconception online that there is the hypertrophy does not
equal increases in strength, and yet you're saying it actually is one of these adaptations that
leads to an increase in strength.
Absolutely.
So essentially what we have to do is understand that you can increase strength without increasing
muscle size.
So that's the first starting point because as you just pointed out, hypertrophy and I'm just going
to, I'm just going to wrap so convergences up into that for the purposes of this conversation,
because it doesn't, it doesn't really matter.
So an increase in muscle size, hypertroid is a mechanism of strength gains, but I can also increase
strength by improving coordination, by reducing cultivation, all those other things.
So yes, and you can pick climbers as my favorite example, like a sport that I do have a passing
acquaintance with.
You can pick climbers as a great example of a group of people who can get absurdly strong, just
frightening me strong without really adding a lot to muscle mass.
So ultimately, yes, we can see very large gains in strength and you can construct training program
as hopefully what I've just spent the last half an hour explaining, you can construct a training
program that will add a lot of strength to a particular lift without necessarily seeing an increase
in muscle size.
So that starting point is absolutely true.
And that is the focus of a lot of the engagement and discussion and, and, and an argument online is
people observing that repeatedly and then doing a victory lap.
And that victory lap is premature because that's not what any everybody is saying when they're
pointing out that hypertrophy is connected to an increase in strength.
That's not what they're saying.
They're not saying that at all.
What they're saying is if you actually do start increasing the size of a muscle fibre in the context
of an exercise, and then you go back and you measure the strength of the exercise, the strength of
the exercise will have gone up.
Now the reason I say that is because if you are, if you understand how neuro mechanical matching
works, neuro mechanical matching is not going to use a muscle fiber for an exercise unless that
muscle fiber contributes to joint torque in that exercise.
So if your brain is going OK, which motor units am I going to use to make this movement happen?
It goes, OK, these are motor units that I'm going to use to make that movement happen.
Let's say I'm doing a biceps girl or a that pull down or something like that and meringue goes, I
need these muscle fibers to contribute or no, it doesn't think that.
It thinks I need these motor units to that particular exercise and it recruits them great, no
problem.
The muscle fibers to the part of those motions have got leverage to do that activity.
If I now go and add niofibrils or sarcomares inside those muscle fibers, I've now got bigger muscle
fibers that produce more force and they are connected to the tendon and they are part of the motor
units that have leverage.
Therefore, I now have a stronger, sorry, I produce a larger joint torque.
There isn't a really a scenario outside of sort of outlier situations in which adding my fibrils to
those Moss fires fails to increase joint torque.
The only scenario in which you could really do that would be if maybe you were lacking a lot of
customers in a particular muscle fiber that was part of a motor unit.
But that would be like almost instantaneously fixed because you would immediately start adding those
customers because the internal nature of the Moss fiber lacking customers would immediately call it
'cause it start adding new customers.
So you'd you'd fix that problem.
Instantaneously.
So even those outlier situations would get fixed.
And when I say outlier, I think just you did not going to see that happening most of the time, but
you theoretically could imagine it occurring.
The point I'm making is that because neuro mechanical matching works the way it does, if you have a
muscle fiber that's been loaded in an exercise, it will contribute to strength gains in that
exercise simply because it has leverage and therefore it is going to contribute to joint talk.
You can't have a muscle fiber that's being recruited, sorry, activated as a result of a recruitment
process and it not contribute to joint talk.
It will do.
And I think this is the nature of the debate, which is that on the one hand, yes, you can increase
strength without increasing muscle size and nobody who understands the Physiology is debating that.
On the opposite side of the equation, you have this comment which I'm standing behind, which is that
if you are testing strength in the trained exercise, then the muscle fibers you've used and loaded
and hypertrophied will contribute to joint torque in the exercise that you've been training because
that's how neuro mechanical matching works.
This is one of those great examples where you actually have to use multiple areas of Physiology to
form your model.
If you just go into a situation and go, well, we don't know well yet.
We do know the number of times I hear hypertrophy researchers, influencers say, well, we don't know.
And I'm like, well, speak for yourself because I think the model is actually very clear.
And when they say they don't know, what they mean is we don't want to do the reading outside of that
area to inform us on how this thing might work.
I said, well, that's your problem there.
I'm just, I'm just kind of reading stuff and trying to make connections and figure out how all this
thing, how all these things fit together and how it makes sense.
I've been very lucky in the sense that other people seem to think that analysis works well, Great,
fantastic.
You know, I'm glad it helps, but I'm doing this because I'm interested in and how this works.
And I think that the neuro mechanical matching principle is an amazing key that unlocks a lot to
these problems.
And this is one of those where it actually does inform as well, which is to say that I can't, I'm
not going to see a scenario in which muscle fires are growing, but don't then contribute to the
exercise in which they were trained in because neuro mechanical matching, which wouldn't let that
happen.
It's odd that it's even contentious because I mean, that's just what progressive overload is.
So it's it's strange that people happy unanimously to agree that previous of overload matters and is
the backbone of hypertroof training.
And yet this still seems to be some contention as to whether hypertrophy will always contribute to
strength or whether, yeah, I guess ultimately that that, you know, can you get stronger or can you
get bigger without actually getting stronger.
That seems to still be a debate, which doesn't make a lot of sense.
I think the, the reasons behind that are sociological rather than other than whatever it is that
we're doing here.
I think ultimately what it comes back to is a, and this is not absolutely not something I want to
get derailed into, but I think what it comes back to is what's your framework for establishing how
something works?
The framework that I'm using is to gather as much information that's available as possible from as
many sources as possible that I think are, you know, sufficiently trustworth worthy to use.
And that's why I really enjoy these conversations that we have where we bring in information from,
from anecdotal data that's pre, pre steroids.
Because as I've said repeatedly for the last however many years, if somebody has anecdotal data
today, I just ignore it.
You know, the nicest possible way because I just don't know.
It doesn't meet my threshold for trustworthiness.
Like, you know, a person can say, well, I don't, I don't use, you know, I don't use anabolics.
I'm not.
Well, thank you for telling me that information, but I don't know whether it's true or not.
So I'm just going to go back to a point when I know for a fact that they didn't take anabolics
because they didn't exist.
And now suddenly I have this confidence in those anecdotal data that I don't have in the anecdotal
data of today, you know, and so, you know, incorporating that and I bring in everything I can about
exercise Physiology from every single place that I've managed to gather information and you form it
into a picture that starts to make sense.
And that's been, I feel incredibly successful in, you know, connecting dots and making a picture
that, that, that that works.
On the other hand, on the other side, what I see people doing who criticise this approach that I
take, what I see people doing is drawing a box around a certain very limited amount of data that
they think is acceptable for including in forming A conclusion.
And they go, we're only prepared to incorporate these.
And if you take that to an extreme, what you find is that some people say, the only studies I'm
prepared to look at for answering this question that I have are those studies that were designed
literally to answer that question.
So for example, they might say when it comes to stretch medium hypertrophy, the only studies I'm
interested in kind of looking at are these training studies that are compared training at different,
you know, joint angle ranges of motion.
I'm like, well, so you don't want to talk about saukamerogenesis literature because you don't think
that's relevant.
You don't want to talk about neurochemical matching because that changes which muscles getting used
in different parts to jointing a range of motion.
You can have a really hard time explaining how things work and understanding how things work
literally using those 12 studies that you've identified as being the only acceptable ones for
answering that question.
If you literally just bring in exercise Physiology for neurochemical matching and sauerogenesis,
your debate goes away and you can move on and solve another problem.
But in those, and we had like a year or two ago, people having literally this exact problem where
they said, no, we don't want to talk about your exercise Physiology, you know, kind of
investigations that you've pulled all this data together and you've used it to answer the question
that we're wrestling with.
We just want to use our 10 studies that we think about.
Look who's managed to get to the right answer though, after all this time.
They're kind of, that group of people has now almost vanished from the Internet.
You know what we used to call the stretch cult, They're pretty much gone.
I mean, maybe I'm, I don't know, I don't follow what goes on, you know, me, I just live in my own
little world.
So maybe I'm mistaken, but I don't see them having the same clout as they did a year or so ago.
You know, whereas a lot of people are now are talking about psychomatanisis and they're mechanical
matching.
They're accepting those concepts and it's like, I think rejecting information out of of hand is an
error.
And I think the people who are trying to limit the inclusion of information is definitely going to
find that they suffer in terms of their ability to find the answers to questions.
Whereas people who are prepared to incorporate more information, as long as that information has a
trustworthy characteristic to it, they're going to find that they are more likely to reach a a
satisfactory answer.
So again, I think we could talk for hours about the sociological reasons why people are doing this,
but at the end of the day, it is what it is.
And there's a group of people who we're talking to who like to include lots of information and try
and piece it together.
And then there's a group of people who we're not talking to, who, you know, get a bit aggravated
with us, who are trying to limit the information and just go, we only want to talk about these tiny
numbers studies because our, you know, I don't know, epistemological approach or whatever it is you
want to describe it as, requires us to limit the sources of information to solving the question.
Now, why people do those, why people take those two approaches is, is is a philosophical question,
you know, and also sociological question, I should say that you could spend hours analyzing, but
that's why we are where we are, because our fundamental approaches to answering questions are
different.
I've always found that interesting where there's, there's often this sort of idea of like in the
particular field you're in, like that's where you need to find those answers.
And, and if an answer pops up in an adjacent field, it's like, well, that's not kind of OK, I can't
take that on board for whatever reason.
It's a competing belief, competing field, whatever.
And I've always thought, well, hang on, No matter where that sort of truth or that information pops
up or that knowledge pops up, like that is if we're seeking what's true, then we should be
integrated in that regardless of where we're finding it.
And, you know, you know where I'm coming from with this.
You know, I, I see, I see it as a sociological phenomenon whereby gatekeeping is a power play, you
know, gatekeep the power of your field by limiting the number of people who have the right to
comment and argue.
That's why you see people at the moment saying, you know, can't use that information to answer this
question.
I'm like, stop me.
Go, go ahead, stop me.
You can't.
I can, I can draw whatever conclusions I want and whatever data I want.
You can tell me that my opinion is not important to you as a result of me taking that approach, and
I'm going to turn around and say I don't care because I don't need your approval.
This is fascinating to me where people say, you know, oh, you can't use that data to answer that
question.
And I'm like, yeah, I can.
You may not approve of me, but I'm not seeking your approval.
I'm not part of your community.
I'm doing my own thing.
And if people are interested in, that's fantastic, I'm glad to help.
But I don't need that.
And this is what the Internet has done in many ways.
It's kind of allowed everybody to be able to just present their views.
And it's broken down a lot of those barriers to the gatekeepers.
And the gatekeepers are now finding that they're fighting a losing battle.
Because if somebody has a better way of answering a question, which I think I have got a better way
of answering these questions, then people just start adopting that.
And like they find themselves now screeching and saying, no, no, no, you can't do that.
You're not allowed to do that.
We don't approve of that.
I'm like, but we don't care, you know, So it is a sociological phenomenon what we're seeing here in
the sense that, you know, one group of people is saying no, no, no, no, you know, we're gatekeeping
the way that this question can be answered.
And maybe before the Internet that would have been, or social media especially that would have been,
that would have been possible to gatekeeper, you'd have been able to do that.
And now you can't.
And now you've got the situation where, you know, like an entire generation of or the next
generation of excise scientists are growing up listening to us and these issues being talked about.
And they would then go into excise science with these approaches and thought processes is behind
them.
And there'll be a conflict in terms of this one, gatekeeping approach and 1, much more open
approach.
And we're going to see some conflict there.
And that's a sociologically fascinating situation that I'm not going to have to deal with.
So I can just kind of sit and watch it and go.
It's like a slow motion kind of collision happening.
But it's very, very interesting to watch.
And I think, you know, I'm going to be curious to see how many people start to notice it happening
or how many people just kind of go along with it.
Because what you'll find obviously, is some people just, you know, carry on with the gatekeeping
approach because it suits them and because, you know, that's just habitual for them and that's what
they're used to.
And then there's other people, as we're seeing, who's just going to go along with the like, well,
what information have you got?
You know, use whatever's useful.
And I think it's very attractive for people who are not part of the old system and are not
benefiting from the gatekeeping approach to actually use that.
Well, what information have you got?
Because ultimately, practicality is to use whatever you've got rather than be a gatekeeper and say,
oh, no, no, no, no, you're only allowed to use these five things because those are the sanctioned
things.
Yeah.
So anyway, rambled extensively there at the end and topics that I really shouldn't have rambled on
because they're not my area of expertise, but hopefully that would have been interesting.
Well, I think it's helpful as a final point point on that for people who are listening when you do,
whether whether we present something or whether someone else presents something.
If, if someone is saying you can't do this or you can't, you know, make that argument or, or
whatever.
Simply assess based on on on what you know, based on what evidence can you not make that claim,
right.
And I think what I see happening is that, you know, people will hear someone say you can't do X and
they'll say, well, this person said that therefore that opinion is or that belief is right or
whatever.
And then someone else might say, but but Chris said you can and therefore you can.
And that's not the right approach either.
Like ultimately the right approach in my opinion would be to actually assess both of those arguments
for their own individual merit.
So as opposed to just aligning.
Knowledge wise, knowledge wise, I would say you can do any fair.
Yep, Yep, Yep.
What what we would do is we would say you can do that, you can.
You can make any argument you like, you can.
It's just that the weight of that argument will be scaled downwards in accordance with the validity
of the information in the context that you are using it.
So you can, you can bring in all kinds of arguments into the equation.
They're just going to, most of them are going to have a modifier of like such a low number that they
become essentially irrelevant.
So you just say they're not relevant.
So terminology wise, you can do pretty much anything.
The reason I'm highlighting the usage of the word can and should in these contexts.
And I made a story about this and Instagram.
I say modal verbs are tricky, you know, because they kind of tell you that the person who is using
them is not framing themselves as an authority figure who is gatekeeping.
You know, they're saying we, you know, the authority are telling you that you what you can and can't
do.
Now, again, trying to stay on track here and avoid derailing myself yet again.
That's just an indicator of the strategy that they are taking in this sociological situation.
My situation's like, well, you can do anything you like in this context of arguing some, but I might
say that I don't accept your argument because I don't think it has any weight.
And that's a separate approach.
I'm accepting all information.
I just will dismiss the conclusion if I think it's irrelevant.
But when somebody starts using modal verbs, for me that's a gigantic red flag that they are
positioning themselves as a gatekeeper, as an authority figure.
And straightaway, again, trying to avoid derailing myself here straightaway, I frame that in that
way.
Well, you did a good job at summarizing exactly the purpose of this podcast and why we started this
in the 1st place, which was to combine these new elements of what you're talking about and the
knowledge and their information, their data that we can obtain from all these different areas and
the questions we can flesh out and pursue and how we can then examine this anecdotal evidence, if
you will, from the past.
So hopefully you guys are enjoying these episodes.
Christmas, Anything else without derailing you that you wanna finish on?
No, I'm not all good for today.
I.
Need to I need to stop?
Well, thank you guys for tuning in.
Hopefully you've enjoyed our our episode on strength and sociology, and we hope you'll join us again
next week.