Episode: 026 How does insufficient sleep affect hypertrophy / atrophy?
URL: https://open.spotify.com/episode/0N7pk5rccEoTvf1nU4PXoq
Published: 2025-11-16
================================================================================

Welcome back everyone to another episode of Hypertrophy, past and present.
Thank you for joining us, Chris, how are you going this week?
I made the joke that you're a professional podcast and in fact, you certainly are now because this
is this is your essentially, basically it's your third podcast in like 24 hours, 48 hours.
Less.
Less than 24.
Less than 24 hours.
Okay, there you go you haven't left your desk.
You've been seeing there podcasting constantly for almost I.
Stopped.
I stopped to sleep and then I'm back on it again.
Yeah.
So yesterday, yesterday did 2 appearances.
So we we recorded the weekly High performance Physiology podcast, which I do with my colleague Rob
Moussari and we talked about straight shortening cycle, very quick introduction to that that'll be
out in a couple of days time.
And then I did a webinar with the hopefully now famous Coach Zia and we talked about how to preserve
muscle mass in a diet or caloric restriction.
And that was that was good.
So we we did that as a live webinar and we had quite a lot of people sign up, nearly 500, I think.
But a lot of people obviously were hoping to just kind of get the recording.
So we had I think maybe 150 in the end who actually attended.
And we're actually going to, I think disappoint a lot of people because while the recording will go
out, it's not going to go out for a couple of days, if not a week.
And it could go out on YouTube.
But we're not going to release the Q&A.
We're only going to release the present presentation itself.
So as and when we do another one of these webinars, I would urge people to try and attend if they
can, if they want to take part in that QA.
And the QAI Think actually ran for about an hour and a quarter in the end.
So we did about 45.
Yeah, we had a really great audience kind of response and we were talking about it afterwards when
we did a little debrief, people were so, you know, kind of interested in the material.
Super kind of respectful and kind and you know, kind of all those other good things.
It was a great atmosphere.
I was really pleased with the people that came on board.
So thanks guys.
If you were part of that, we really appreciated you.
And you know, I would encourage people, again, as I said, if they want to be part of that and
benefit from that, then please do show up next time because we aren't going to release the Q&A's as
you know, kind of video material.
We're just going to release the editor version of the presentation.
So yeah, it will be available, but not the whole thing.
How long was that part of the video?
So I think we talked on the presentation side for about 45 minutes.
I mean, we had, we had to wait a little bit at the beginning because there was a lot of people
trying to get on to the, to the, to the webinar space.
I'm saying we started about 10 past the hour and then we ran nearly to the end of the hour, not
quite to the end of the hour.
So 4550 minutes.
And basically just start with a quick representation of the stimulating Rats model.
Because I think now that the Stimulating Rats model is quite mature, people have missed a point that
it is unique in so far as it connects basic Physiology with strength training practices which had
never been done before.
People just kind of made stuff up and kind of drew lines and tried to figure out how things were
working.
It didn't really make any sense.
Now we have Direct Line between fundamental concepts like MOTI recruitment and Hanneman size
principle leading through to actual training recommendations.
Same thing with forced velocity relationship, chemical tension, sarcoma, densis, passive tension,
You know, the basic fatigue mechanism.
Neuro mechanical matching.
All of that stuff is textbook Physiology.
I know that you've got influences running around the Internet claiming that neuro mechanical
matching is not a thing, but you know, those aren't people writing textbooks.
We've got this stuff relatively well documented.
It feeds through into training recommendations.
So I started off explaining how that worked.
And then I just went into the key material, which was working through 5 specific areas in which
caloric restriction is going to have a negative impact, either direct or indirect, on the
preservation of muscle mass in that period of time when you're preparing maybe for a bodybuilding
competition.
So went through those five areas in detail and explained just how they're working.
We didn't go into absolutely, you know, absolutely every single detail.
I mean, we're going to obviously do a little bit more on one of those areas today, but it was, I
think enough for people to understand the the broad picture of how things are working.
So hopefully people enjoyed it if they attended.
Hopefully people will also enjoy if they see the video of that specific presentation.
But as I say, the Q&A was a great experience.
I thought it was a really good atmosphere, really great questions.
So again, thank you if you took part, if you're listening to this now.
Yeah, and like you said, stay tuned because it will be up on YouTube if he did miss out in the next
week or when.
We can get it out there.
Yeah, absolutely.
O this is our, I think it's our first Part 2 eisode.
We have, perhaps you've done a couple on MPs and my office that sort of over over time is sort of
evolved.
So this is the the first time we've had a topic.
We've intentionally split over 2 episodes.
So if you haven't listened to last week's episode, make sure you do.
You don't technically need to in order like this episode will still make sense, I assume, but it
would be good to kind of get the full picture and, and listen to it.
Now, I did explain last week that since our topic is all about sleep, there's not a whole lot of
sleep related plans I could lean into from the silver era.
So I've just gone last week.
I went with an athletic plan.
This week I'm going with something completely different.
Well, I say different.
It's kind of similar to stuff we've seen.
But the reason I want to talk about it is a bit different.
And this plan is coming from someone named Bill Pearl.
Now I anticipate a lot of listeners will have heard of Bill Pearl.
And what's interesting about Bill Pearl is he won a lot of Miss Universe competitions, but he
started winning in the East and and continued winning in the 60s and into the 70s.
Now for any St. listeners there, you'll know that this is the, the time period where Anabolic
started to be introduced, produced.
And so he really well sort of bridges this era of pre anabolic silver era, kind of coming into the
golden era.
Now the other interesting piece about Bill is he publicly talked about his anabolic use.
And so you can actually look up photos of, and I would encourage listeners to do so of photos of
Bill when he was competing sort of early on in his career when he wasn't using anabolics.
And then look at later photos when he was winning in the in late 60s and look at what his physique
looked like at that point.
And it's just an interesting case study in how even early anabolic agents, and obviously they've
evolved a lot over time, but just seeing how that influenced people's physique at that point.
So what I want to discuss today is a plan that he published.
Technically speaking, this is after anabolics were being experimented with, but it is before Bill
had been using them.
So this plan was written in in 1957.
I believe sometime around 19581959 is when Bill Pearl presumably started using anabolic.
So this is for all intents and purposes probably still a pre anabolic plan.
Now it is a plan that he published for others to follow.
OK, so this is not technically his training routine, but I think that we would be able to see some
principles of how he would be training in a plan that he's publishing for others.
So that is the plan today.
And I don't want to give too much away.
I was going to yeah, I'm going to sit in that.
But it'll make sense why we might be talking about this at a later time.
But let's talk about this plan now.
So as is fairly standard, full body and done three times per week.
Now, in some of these plans, when, when you see these in books or in magazines, sometimes what
happens is the author might give people like a suggested starting way to use.
And obviously even today, I get this question from, from clients like, Hey, what weight do I use?
And, you know, obviously we, we sort of know a little bit more about it.
Now.
It's like, Hey, I'm not going to tell you what weight to use.
I, I need you to go to kind of, you know, what your sort of strength level is and, you know, tell
people you have to reserve whatever else.
But often what they would do back then is they give people an idea of, Hey, this is a starting
weight, OK.
And then they would talk about how to progress it over time.
But he did sort of give people a, a suggested starting load to use.
And then he did talk about like how to progress that weight over time.
And so the way that he talked about progressing that weight over time meant that essentially people
weren't going to be hitting like a zero Rep reserve or failure with each set each week.
So there was like a progression model built into it.
And a lot of the time they were kind of building in some of these progression models, but usually
they were using like a double progression method.
But I think it's important to note that they weren't generally just taking each set to failure.
Yeah, when they were progressing load, they were often then keep being a rare poetry reps in
reserve.
So this is done three times a week and it's 11 exercises, which again is fairly standard at this
point in time.
I'd say maybe 12 exercises is potentially the norm, but certainly anywhere from that sort of, you
know, 8 to 15 is, is very standard around this time.
So we begin with sit ups.
Now it was sit ups with with feet elevated and he did one set 10 to 30 is what he suggested doing
and then moved into a leg press doing three sets of 10 and then did a toe press on the leg press.
So obviously, you know, nicely convenient sort of set sort of pairing there.
And that was again three sets of 15 to 20 repetitions.
Then a barbell vertical shrug 2 sets of 10A barbell overhead press 2 sets of 10 bent over one arm
dumbbell row two sets of 10 and then a wide grip bench with about three sets of 10 dumbbell French
curl.
So seated 2 sets of 10 seated dumbbell curls, 2 sets of 10 barbell incline press 2 sets of 10 and
then dumbbell flies 2 sets of 10 as well.
Obviously there's I know you're going to immediately say that there's certain muscles that are
getting much more work and muscles that are getting much less work, but I'll pass over to you.
What do you, what do you see there?
Well.
And I don't think anybody's going to be surprised when I point out that there's no pull ups or pull
downs in that.
So there's no frontal plane pulling, but you know, giving props there.
There is a sagittal plane pull in the form of the bent over 1 armed dumbbell row.
And there is obviously the shrug.
So it's not like there's no back work in there.
It's just definitely, as you say, you know, one of those muscle routes that does seem to be
underrepresented.
I do like, and this is a comment that I've made multiple times in similar programs before, I do like
the fact that there is a variety of pressing of the kind that we need.
So a lot of people will just throw in a bunch of pressing exercise variations and it's like, what
are you really, you know, kind of targeting different muscle groups with those choices?
Whereas here, you know, we've got a wide grip bench press.
Fantastic.
And then contrast that with the overhead press, which is presumably behind the neck.
So 2 very, very different, one frontal plane, one transverse plane.
And then I'm guessing the incline press is probably sagittal plane.
So, you know, I think that's a really nice combination there, obviously, you know.
So in in that combo there so the incline, the wide grip flat bench and then the dumbbell fly so.
Yeah, of course, the flies as well.
Yeah.
I mean, I would say the flies and the wide grip venture basically duplication.
I don't think that's that's worth doing.
Yeah, that was going to be my question, if you saw any value to that fly.
No, not really.
I think the pressing variations is really solid.
I like that a lot.
And the combination of those three, I think that's that's a really classic, you know, kind of way of
setting that up.
You know, that's, that's something I think is really worth worth considering in this kind of
template.
But no, I don't think the fly is adding anything really.
But then he's just is.
The fly getting potentially any upper chess, a more upper chess than the wide grip bench might be.
I mean, obviously even if they have that covered in the incline, so there's between.
Those only in so far as only in so far as your recruitment might be slightly higher.
I mean, obviously with dumbbells you might have, if, if you've got a bit of a stability issue, you
might lose what you think you're gaining.
And I'm not a fan of dumbbell flies because it's like, you know, if you've, if you've gone to the
trouble of doing a single joint exercise because you, you, the purpose of doing that is to increase
recruitment.
That's why bodybuilders called, you know, single arm curls concentration girls.
It's because you're trying to essentially lock down your recruitment into one area.
It's the same concept.
We're going from multi joint, single joint.
So the whole purpose of doing a single joint exercise is to focus recruitment on one specific
muscle.
Then why would you then use an unstable load to do that?
It makes no sense.
You, you you're losing the very thing that you're trying to gain.
So you're much better off doing a family in a machine context if you're capable of doing that.
I mean, it might be too strong for the machine, I don't know.
But you know, if, if that's a possibility, I would always do that.
But yeah, I don't see the value in the fly, particularly in this context.
I like the pressing combinations in terms of the other stuff, I mean, but obviously, you know, for
me, like a leg press is an option.
It cuts down on the muscle mass that you're using.
It's easier to warm up for it.
I'm as big a fan of the squat as many people are to press on.
Leg press is fantastic.
Again, it's a great calf exercise.
It's the one I would probably program if it was only programming one.
Not quite sure what's going on with the curls.
That seems a bit strange to me, but I mean maybe you can shed some light on that.
On the lack of curls.
No, there's two different color variations, but it's like, I mean, how?
How are they different?
Sorry, I thought you meant like, OK, yeah, yes, because there's no hamstring work, obviously.
No, there's no hamstring.
That seems to be like another one of those things is like you could almost argue that body does at
that time perhaps only thought they were ever going to be seen from the front because we've got no
hamstring work and we've got no back work.
So it's like you know, but that just seemed to be overriding tendency.
I do, I must admit I'm not actually that up to scratch with their like in terms of what they're
posing routines would have actually, I mean, I do wonder if maybe there just actually wasn't as much
posing or emphasis on the back.
But I don't know, maybe I'm completely off the mark there.
But it is definitely a pattern pattern that's it's repeated.
You know, it's not just like an isolated thing we're seeing either.
It's I understand the hamstrings, obviously, you know, in the absence of a hip hinge, there's not a
lot they could have particularly done.
But as you've pointed out many times back work there's a few other options available to them, so.
Yeah, honestly, there's no scenario in which you could argue that a deadlift isn't a possibility.
So stiff leg deadlifts are absolutely a possibility for anybody with a Barber and pull ups.
You can literally do that, you know, almost anywhere.
If you've got a little bit of engineering, know how you can set up a station to do that.
So honestly, I don't think it has to.
It has to be a non practical reason.
It's not like saying, look, there's no leg curl and there's no knee extension.
Well, yeah, but they didn't have them so they wouldn't be able to do that.
It's not like saying that.
It's actually saying that they chose not to do this stuff because they didn't want to do it, which
is weird.
Yeah.
So, but anyway, yeah, what what is the difference between a seated?
So the curls, yeah.
So the French curl is triceps.
So that's a seated overhead tricep exception.
OK, OK, I misunderstood then.
So that isn't that isn't 2 separate curl variations.
That is a French, that's a French press more or overhead children.
Yeah.
So they, yes, no, good point.
Yeah.
So they called.
I'm trying to remember the other name that they call these exercises, but a lot of the tricep
exercises they were calling curls.
Weirdness.
Yeah, I think they just called in triceps curls, but I need to go back and double check.
But yeah, it was definitely a labeling thing that shifted over time.
OK, that makes a little bit more sense now.
So yeah, OK, OK, fine.
Yeah, yeah.
OK.
So he's got 2 two sets of direct arm work, triceps and biceps.
Yeah, OK, well that makes the program a little bit more well-rounded.
And so, yeah, the things that really missing then is just that the the hamstrings and the and the
and the extra back exercise.
So, so yeah, I guess if I were to modify this, I would take out the fly straight away.
There's obviously a big emphasis healing chest.
Yeah, I'd take the fly out and replace it with a pull up or a pull down.
If you've got a machine, I'd probably take the sit ups out and place that with a stiff leg deadlift
and that would probably be a program that I would probably do.
I mean for me I would take the direct arm work out because I don't need it, but other people will
want that.
Yeah, if you made those little adjustments, there's not really anything you're missing, is there?
No, it'd be pretty good actually.
Yeah.
I'm trying to think if there's something else that would change, but no, I think that's about it.
Obviously if you've got equipment nowadays, you've got a leg extension or something by all means,
but given what they would have had access to at that point, I think that's actually quite good with
those 22 little tweaks.
Yeah, it's interesting.
The sets as well.
So like I'm just looking, you know, he's he's doing a third set on a leg press and he's doing a
third set on a bench, but everything else is 2 sets.
And I'm one like the leg Crest me makes sense because that's the only exercise which he's getting
for, I mean, effectively it's, it's basically his only lower body exercise.
So that makes sense.
And I'm guessing the bench is just because that must be his some guessing priority.
So it's interesting that there wasn't like this unanimous already three sets of everything or
whatever.
It's like no, actually this adding this third set maybe for high priority, but that's it.
I wonder what his rationale was.
Yeah.
No, I don't know.
Yeah, it's tricky.
I mean, it could be that, you know, he's using a lot more weight on those exercises and actually
he's.
Yeah.
Think maybe that three sets allows for, you know, just taking a little bit more of a build up to his
top set.
I mean, I, I don't know.
He might be right there because he did actually add weights in successive sets.
So it may be that he's using that first set almost a bit like a warm up set and then that second set
might be sort of two reps reserve.
And that said, because again he's adding weight each set and these he's his ability to that final
set.
So yeah, maybe that's all it is actually.
So, yeah, no, I mean another great example of a routine done, you know, three times a week, full
body and 11 exercises, which you know covers everything and is not a million miles away from what we
would probably right now.
Just a couple of preferences in two places, really shift of preferences, not perfect, but really
very close to what we would say is physiologically ideal and 1,000,000 miles away from what you see
in the 80s, nineties instances in terms of routines that are just utterly ridiculous.
So you know, I think that's no, that's really cool.
That's really cool.
Yeah, so Part 2 on sleep.
OK, yes.
Where do we pick up?
So last time we talked about, well, we gave an introduction to the various terminologies that
researchers use around sleep.
So this is really that part of the last week's podcast which will be beneficial.
So if you're not familiar with what sleep deprivation is, what sleep restriction is, what persistent
sleep restriction is, and those kind of terminologies, then last week's podcast will be definitely
useful to you.
Really what I want to talk about and last week the focus was how does sleep loss or insufficient
sleep affect workout performance?
How is it affecting you in terms of your ability to, you know, kind of do what you want to do in the
in the context of that that worker.
This time we're going to talk about how sleep effects.
Atrophy as in does it sleep loss cause atrophy?
And secondly, as a kind of a carry on from that corollary of that, you know, how does insufficiency
perfect your recovery from a workout?
And I'm actually going to show that those two things are actually quite closely related to each
other, so.
And this is independent.
So last week, obviously we talked about the performance side.
So this is independent of the impact.
It is, yeah.
Totally separate.
Totally separate issues.
So a lot of the time what you'll find is that influencers will talk about these things separately.
They'll say, you know, does several bad nights of sleep affect my workout performance?
Is it changing my ability to hit high levels of recruitment?
Well, yes, it is.
And you can hear us talking about that last week.
Secondly, you'll also find influencers.
We will sort of argue and explain that sleep is a key process of the post workout recovery kind of
period of time.
And again I'll explain a level of detail up from what they're going to tell you in today's
conversation.
So basically starting at the very beginning and let me put this in context of the literature.
There is a, in fact, relatively well developed section of the Physiology literature which deals with
the effects of insufficient sleep on muscle loss.
And it's it's mainly done in animal models simply because obviously it's unethical, you know, to
deprive people of sleep for long period of time and then watch how it affects muscle loss.
You know, people will obviously jump around and wave their hands in the air and go, I'm going to
ignore everything you're saying because I don't like the fact that you haven't got a study in
humans.
I'm like, OK, we'll carry on doing what you're doing then.
So we have got a lot, but it is a very well developed area of literature.
So there's some really good stuff.
So I'd encourage people who are interested in it to actually dive in and start reading some of that
stuff.
There's a lot there.
The classic model is basically about sort of 72 to 96 hours of sleep deprivation in in rodents, and
you get some pretty meaningful muscle loss over that period of time.
So definitely a very meaningful effect.
The way that it seems to happen is because the sleep loss produces a stress response and it's a
pretty big stress response.
We're not talking about a small increase in cortisol like you get after a strength training workout.
So I'm already kind of predicting what the responses to this conversation are going to be online.
People are going to hear me say the word cortisol and they're immediately going to have a knee jerk
reaction that says doesn't cause muscle loss after strength training workouts.
I'm like, you're absolutely correct.
The response is tiny.
It's not a really big deal.
And also you're in a anabolic state because you've just done a strength training workout.
But when you have a period of large, a large period of sleep loss, a couple of days of sleep loss in
animal models, you get a very, very pronounced glucocorticoid response, which is essentially telling
you that you've got a major stressor in place.
Now the important thing to note is that you can find similar stress responses or glucocorticoid
responses in other models.
So you can find them in the animal models of a traumatic injury.
You can find them in animal models of exogenous glucocorticoids.
So essentially corticosteroids, the kind of anti-inflammatory that people maybe are prescribed after
an injury of some description.
So you can find, you know, multiple models of those same high levels of glucocorticoid, and you can
see essentially the same effects being reported across all of those models.
In fact, you can go one step further than that, and this is where you can take things out of the
animal kind of literature and into the human literature.
You can find studies that have looked at essentially what's called hypercortisolemia in human
situations.
Now, these are not controlled trials because because obviously you're you're observing something
that's happened now usually by accident.
So somebody has a traumatic injury and you monitor them while they're being treated and you get
information that's then useful that you can then compare with other control subjects that you kind
of select afterwards.
So it's not a perfectly controlled situation because you're relying on the chance of somebody, you
know, kind of showing up with an injury that you can then, you know, kind of benefit from the
knowledge of.
So what happens is somebody will come in with an injury, for example, and they will, they
immediately experience a hypercorticalemia response as a result of that injury.
And you've got them obviously in a hospital bed and they stay there for a couple of days while
they're recovering.
So you've got this situation where they've got this person who's been injured and they're in a
hospital bed.
And you measure the kind of atrophy that happens over that period of time.
And what you then do is you get a control person to go and sit in bed for the same duration of time.
So you've got a trial essentially where you've got one person who's got a traumatic injury and in
bed and another person who's just in bed for the same period of time.
And what you notice is that the atrophy is a lot faster in the person who's got the injury compared
to the person who hasn't.
And it's basically because of this cortisol induced effect.
So it's like there is a place you can go to in the literature and you can see this effect happening.
It's just a little bit of a weird kind of experimental model because we can't replicate that very
easily.
So presumably in these models, these participants like they're still eating over this time like?
There's totally, yeah, totally, yeah.
So, you know, you've got you've got a, you know, sort of feeding control situation, but basically
you're, you're, you're monitoring the the effect.
Now this is something we're going to come back to and do a podcast on in the future, but I'm going
to mention it now so that people have this in context of me explaining this.
But if you compare the muscle protein synthesis rates and the muscle protein breakdown rates of
somebody who is in bed, both rates are actually very, very low.
You one of the things you notice about bed rest is that not only does muscle protein synthesis come
down, but muscle protein breakdown decreases as well.
So you've actually got very little turnover in total of synthesis and breakdown rates.
If you look at somebody in bed with traumatic injury, MPs and MPB are both off the charts.
It's ridiculous.
It's like if I just took the top line and looked to MPs, you would think that they were in a highly
anabolic state compared to someone in bed rest without the dramatic injury.
And this is the thing that I keep going back to and people keep.
It's like, I say it and people kind of look at me as if to say, did you really say that?
And I'm like, yes, I did.
If somebody has an injury that MPs goes off the charts, it jumps really high.
And that's because MPs is used for damage repair.
But at the same time you've got even more breakdown going on and you're actually atrophying.
So this is the nonsense that some of the hypertrophy researchers have managed to tangle themselves
in at the moment because they're like, Oh no, every time MPs goes up that means we're in an anabolic
state.
You can't possibly lose muscle.
And I'm like, let me introduce you to poor Mr. Smith who sat in a hospital bed, has just had a, an
injury and his MPs is off the charts and he's atrophying like crazy.
Are you really serious telling me?
Oh no, no, no, no, we don't mean that.
That's different.
I'm like, no, it's not.
It's just present logically the same situation.
You've got damage repair happening at the same time as you've got atrophy happening.
You've absolutely got an anabolic response happening to produce this damage repair, but you've
simultaneously got a breakdown effect that is causing you net protein degradation.
So The thing is that you can have these situations where you've got, as I say, in bed rest normally
with no injury at very, very low MPs, very low MPB.
In the case of traumatic injury and bed rest simultaneously, you can get very high MPs, very high
MPB, but the MPB is bigger and as a result, you're in that protein loss.
You're actually atrophying over that period of time.
Now interestingly, you can experimentally replicate that identical situation with somebody in bed
rest if you start giving them exogenous glucocorticoids.
So you create experimental hypercorticoids, bulimia essentially without needing to go down the route
of, you know, kind of waiting for somebody who unfortunately gets injured and trying to take
advantage of that unfortunate circumstance.
You could actually just experimentally create high levels of glucocorticoids by, you know, the
application of a cortico steroid and you get exactly the same effect immediately.
MPs jumps up and MPB jumps, you know, jumps up as well.
You end up with this high turnover but net protein loss as well.
So even without the injury you still see MPs go up.
If you impose, if you impose A glucocorticoid response, you get the same effect.
So it's showing us that it's not the injury itself that's creating the issue, it's the
glucocorticoid response to the injury that's creating the issue.
Yeah, that's interesting because I assume there must have been the injury itself.
But yeah, obviously given that it's it's telling us it's not.
So do you want to, just in case anyone's unaware, you mentioned muscle protein breakdown, you've
mentioned MPs muscle protein synthesis and you've alluded to the the balance between those two being
important.
Can you just sort of elaborate that on that briefly?
Yeah.
So every muscle fiber in the body is always in a state of flux.
You're always.
You're not.
They're not.
The proteins inside the fiber are not constant.
You know, they're not immortal.
What you've got is a constant state of rebuilding and destroying, rebuilding and destroying.
And so ultimately, we've always got a balance between the rate of synthesis, construction of
proteins, and the rate of degradation, destruction of proteins.
So if you increase synthesis more than you increase breakdown, if you increase both synthesis and
breakdown at the same time, the same amount, nothing happens.
Your flux increases, but your actual content of the protein, the fiber, the size of fiber stays the
same.
So you could get there if you had an incredibly high rate of flux, you could end the day with a
totally different set of proteins inside the fiber from when you started the day, but your size of
the fiber would be the same.
So you have what I would call changes, but no change in size.
If you change the balance between synthesis and breakdown, and you end up with a shift in One
Direction or the other.
Now what we're trying to do is change the shift so that synthesis increases more than breakdown.
So.
So maintenance does go back one step.
So what when people talk about maintenance, they're not saying that the muscles, the muscle itself
is not changing, that there's no change in contractile protein to anything.
They're saying that there's an equal balance, I guess, of building and losing.
Cross a period of time and during that period of time you're going to have periods when synthesis is
higher than breakdown.
You can have periods when breakdown is higher than synthesis.
If you have say a three day period of time, or let's just go with the classic maintenance
literature, you've got a weak period of time.
You do 3 or 4 sets on Monday.
You come back the following, we can do another three or four sets and you're in maintenance of
muscle size over a six month period of time, which is what the literature shows each week, you're
going to have synthesis elevated above breakdown rates for the first maybe 48 hours past the
workout.
And then for the remaining 5 days of the week, you're going to have breakdown above synthesis
because you're going to be in essentially net protein loss for that back five days.
And that back five days is going to equal more or less protein loss of what you gained in the first.
So even within like maintenance, maintenance is never really going to mean that synthesis equals
breakdown ever.
Really.
It's going to mean that for some periods of time of the week, you're going to be a bit more
synthesis, a bit less breakdown.
The other period of time, it's going to be opposite way around.
Obviously for strength training progress, we want to be constantly with a little bit more synthesis
over breakdown.
But there's this been this been, this has been an obsession by the Hypertroch research community on
synthesis and they're just trying to ignore breakdown because it's hard to measure and they're going
to forget about it.
I'm like, if you look at the injury literature, you can see massive jumps in MPs at the same time as
massive jumps in MPB.
It's about balance.
It's not about one or the other.
And the interesting thing though, is that when we talk about stressors of major magnitude, I'm not
talking about having to go to the shops twice a week instead of once.
I'm talking about actually a major stress or like an injury or severe sleep loss for multiple days,
you know, something significant, substantial, then you're going to see a big glucocorticoid
response.
You're going to find that you start to get these elevations in muscle protein breakdown occurring,
which is going to start atrophying the muscle fibers directly.
Now the really cool thing is we actually have a distinctive process that's been identified for how
this works.
So we know that the glucocorticoid stimulates a receptors of those glucocorticoids in muscle fibers
and that triggers a number, at least three pathways have been identified, including the mitochondria
themselves, which then stimulate an elevation and reactive oxygen species oxidative stress inside
the muscle fibers.
So we've got a very clear set of, you know I've got a clear pathway, a map to show how the
glucocorticoid response to the stressor which is a very well documented phenomenon that doesn't need
defence at all.
So we've got stressor leading to glucocorticoid response leading to oxidative stress as I say by
three separate pathways including mitochondrial kind of activities.
And the oxidative stress then leads to an increase in the most protein breakdown rates above and
beyond what we would typically expect in that given scenario.
Now the reason we know that it takes that route is because if you go and experimentally reduce a
glucocorticoid response in the muscle, however you do it, I mean, there's a number of experimental
models could do that.
The classic 1 is just exogenous glucocorticoids.
You just inject with corticosteroid, but you can also do it with heat stress.
You just raise the temperature slightly for a day or two and you get the same kind of effect.
So it is a genuine stress response.
It's not not saying, you know, all these experiments are done with just synthetic glucocorticoids.
And therefore people go, well, yeah, that's not the same.
Yeah, you can create the same effect with the heat stress.
Just raise temperature a couple of degrees, you're going to get the same problem.
So you can actually create this endogenously as well as exogenously.
It doesn't.
It doesn't different if you go in after having done that.
So you measure this kind of atrophy occurring as a result of the leukochorticoid induced oxidative
stress producing muscle protein breakdown producing atrophy.
If you go in and you actually now stop the oxidative stress from happening by maybe some kind of
antioxidant, maybe you use vitamin E or something, and like in an experimental model, you go in and
you do that, it actually stops the atrophy happening.
So we've got this really nice documented flow of events from stress to glucocorticoids, torx,
sedative stress to muscle protein breakdown to atrophy.
This is really well done.
This is not like, you know, kind of a lot of the hypertrophy research, whether like we can see MPs
increasing.
Oh, therefore we're going to now invent an entire scheme of how hypertrophy works and how, you know,
volume is amazing and all this kind of this is really good data-driven analysis.
This is like people who've gone through very carefully and gone, oh, look, sleep loss creates A
glucocorticoid response and it also produces atrophy.
Maybe there's a connection between those two.
Let's piece this together very slowly and carefully until we figure out how it's working and they
go, OK, so we've got stress glucocorticoids, oxidative stress react to oxygen species.
We've now got a pathway, 3 pathways by which the glucocorticoid receptor starts to trigger that
oxidative stress side, the virus.
Look, now we've got a way to block the oxidative stress and stop the atrophy happening.
And oh look, you know, the muscle protein breakdown is the is the pathway to buy which the oxidative
stress is causing the atrophy.
It's very, very, very well done piece or set of studies, you know, So I think this is much more
confidence in this than I've got in a lot of the hypertrophy stuff, to be honest.
This is this is really good work.
I'm sure people listen to this are thinking, well hang on then, can I just use some of these
antioxidants and mitigate some of that effect?
You have to verify that you know the animal models are designed to find mechanisms.
They're not designed to find new ways to deal practically with solution with your problems of sleep
loss.
This is me describing how researchers have discovered the mechanisms by which sleep loss causes
atrophy.
This is not me at all saying you know what strategies might be appropriate in cases of and.
They could potentially be be drawbacks from pursuing a strategy like that anyway when it comes to
potentially using antioxidants to try to mitigate some of that effect.
You know, obviously we're not making a comment on that bit.
I just, I kind of want to put out there that hey, that doesn't mean that the solution to this is go
pump yourself full of antioxidant and see if you can mitigate any downside.
It may not be as simple as that.
Yeah.
And I mean, yeah, I mean there's other stuff going on there as well as we'll come to and we talk
about the effects of your Cortico is on recovery because again that's that's one of those areas
probably that is going to be conflicting with what we're saying here.
I'll come to that later on.
But in terms of just squaring the circle, what I've described here is the standard hypothesis or
hypothetical mechanism for how sleep loss is producing atrophy in humans and animals.
As I was going through the literature, I noticed an interesting set of observations, which I think
support this model that don't often get talked about, you know, together.
So I just want to kind of list them out together and show you as an audience why I think this is a
really solid model.
If you look at the standard ways of causing atrophy in any animal, the 2 standard ways of doing it
are immobilization or caloric restriction.
I mean that that kind of is, you know, the really basic and you might argue natural ways of of kind
of making this happen.
The kind of situation.
It's like we're not imposing stressors here.
We're just, you know, kind of watching what happens when an animal doesn't have quite enough to eat
or it's not moving around so much.
Nothing scary.
If you look at those situations, you see a distinctive pattern of how the atrophy is happening.
If you now look at the stress induced muscle loss, you actually see very big differences across
multiple areas.
So firstly, one of the most striking things you see about glucocorticoid induced muscle loss is it's
very, very much a type 2 muscle fiber phenomenon.
If you look at the muscle loss that happens during caloric restriction or immobilization, it's not,
it actually effects type 1 and type 2 fibers.
Now if you don't understand what you're looking at, you can get yourself in a knot here just to
explain why.
So a lot of animal models will use chloro extriction and then they'll will they will notice type 2
fiber preferential atrophy.
Now the reason that's happening in the main is because if you imagine you've got an animal or two
separate groups of animals, a control group and a non an intervention group, then one group is the
intervention groups eating slightly less maybe and the the control group is eating normally.
What you'll find is that the intervention group will either lose weight or it will maintain weight
and the control group will obviously gain weight.
Now what's going to happen is that because of the weight difference, your normal physical activity
is now not going to reach the same level of recruitment as it did previously.
When we've talked about this with older people, and if you have older person who gains body weight,
they're going to start using their leg muscles to a higher level of recruitment than they were
previously.
They lose body weight, they're going to stop using their like upper body mass just in an older
person who's not but.
You've seen this with the weighted vests, you've seen those studies where they have all the
existence that way that they gain less on the lower body.
Yeah, you're not controlling physical activity levels for recruitment levels in those situations.
So you actually find that if you take an an animal model and it loses weight, it will stop using its
high threshold motor units to do its normal activities, but it doesn't need to anymore.
So you lose muscle size in those fat plastic fibers.
So you actually, if you don't know what you're doing physiologically, if you don't have a model of
how Physiology is working, you are going to look at those calorie restriction studies and you go,
well, now I've got these calorie restriction studies that.
Show, you know, preferential type 2 fabulous you're wrong.
I'm like, no, I'm not, you just don't understand what you're looking at.
You know, you actually have to understand how Physiology works if you want to interpret those
studies correctly.
So generally speaking, if you if you look at controlled situations, you actually find that type 2
and type 1 fiber size decreases largely in proportion with fiber size that we talked about in a
previous podcast.
So it's generally speaking a size phenomenon, not a type phenomenon.
In contrast, glucocorticoids aggressively goes after, or more accurately, type 2 fibers are much
more sensitive to the glucocorticoid problem than type 1 fibers are.
So there's that in terms of size changes.
So you see a very, very big difference in that respect.
In contrast, second observation, you actually get weirdly quite a bit of muscle damage in the slow
twitch fibers after glucocorticoid applications, which you don't tend to see in immobilization or
chloro restriction.
So there's this weird kind of damage effect going on, probably the up to date to stress generating
some interesting effects, maybe because there's a lot more mitochondria in the type 1 fibers, so you
get a lot more oxidative stress through that pathway, Who knows.
But there's an interesting feature there and it can be really quite pronounced as it starts to look
like incomplete muscle damage repair in those situations, which is very, very weird.
So there's there's that marker if you like, which is unique to glucocorticoid, which you don't see
in situations of immobilization so much and certainly not in caloric restriction.
Thirdly, I've kind of made a point quite a few times that you can't just eat a ton of protein and
stop muscle atrophy happening.
It it doesn't work.
It's like, you know, protein on its own, dietary protein on its own doesn't change anything in terms
of artery rates if you're just, you know, creating the atrophy by reduced activity level or caloric
restriction or something like that.
In contrast, there do look to be a couple of dietary interventions that might influence the atrophy
caused by sleep loss.
For example, largely leucine seems to have a little bit of a, a mediative effect, if that, if that's
a word, it doesn't, it kind of preserves a little bit more muscle mass in the context of of sleep
loss induced atrophy, whereas that doesn't really work in the classic immobilization or kind of
caloric restriction induced atrophy situation.
And of course, finally, something I've already mentioned, if you compare what happens during
immobilization and chloro restriction, which is predominantly a reduction in MPs, you don't really
get a big jump in MPB in chloro restriction unless you go crazy with it.
You do.
And you don't get out with immobilization either.
You do get this huge increase in MPB with glucocorticoid situations, whether it's sleep loss,
stress, traumatic injury, exogenous glucocorticoid, you name anything, they all create the same
effect, which is a big jump in MPB.
So really for me, when I look at this picture, I've got these distinctive characteristics of
glucocorticoid administration or generation.
Whether it's exogenous or endogenous doesn't really matter, which are unique features of the atrophy
that's happening that are shared across all of these scenarios.
So again, not only is the literature base itself really solid and the model and the investigative
processes have been really well done.
Not only that, but when I come to it as an intuitive kind of investigator going, does this make
sense to me?
Can I see the same features that are occurring across all of these situations?
And can I see those features being different from standard immobilization or or calorie restriction
end user atrophy?
Yes, I can.
So that gives me a lot of comfort that I'm seeing something that is a repeated phenomenon that is
consistent across all of these situations.
So that for me gives me a lot of confidence in saying I think this model is probably correct.
I think it's a really well constructed model and they've done a really amazing job of pulling this
together.
Do you know why the Lucene scenes had a big impact in?
I knew that question was going no, I don't.
I mean, that's kind of like, and I had a lot of nutrition questions on the on the webinar yesterday
and I'm just like, you know, I don't want to fall into the trap of so there's a very, I don't know
if you ever saw the film Patch Adams with Robin Williams.
Yeah, ages ago.
Yeah, Co starring Philip Seymour Hoffman, which which was one of my favorite actors, very sad when
he died.
And they they play off each other fantastically in this film.
It's such a great kind of conflict.
They managed to conflict a relationship with the two of them.
Now there's this scene where essentially Philip Seymour Hoffman's character is just assuming that
Patch Adams can't possibly, you know, kind of beat him in the in the, in the, in the examinations
and the scores that they get because he never sees him working.
So he kind of just doesn't really understand that this guy is a genius and he can literally
understand all this stuff and basically just not do any work.
Hoffman's character is working is, you know, posterior surface off and and not managing to kind of
get to the same level of successes as Adams is or Robin Williams character is is achieving.
So I don't want to be that guy.
I don't want to be the Hoffman's character.
And now I don't want to be the person who goes.
I can't do it, so nobody else can do it either because I'm the cleverest person ever.
I don't want to be that person.
All I can say is that I know what my limits are in terms of being able to get my arms around an
area.
My limits for what I can get my arms around are limited to muscle Physiology.
If I start pushing out into systemic Physiology or too far into nutrition or anywhere, anywhere
outside of what I'm super comfortable with, I'm going to start making mistakes.
You know, I'm not saying that there isn't a Patch Adams out there who can do that.
Maybe there's somebody else who can do everything I do, plus they can do nutrition, plus they can
do, you know, kind of natural health, plus they can do XY and Z as well.
Maybe they can, but I can't.
I can only do what I can do, you know, so I'm not saying other people can't do that, but I do know
that my capacities are limited to to addressing muscle Physiology and nothing more.
So and people start asking me questions about nutrition and systemic Physiology.
I'm like, I have to draw a line here and say I can't give you the expert answer on that.
I can only give you the expert answer on this area that I'm super confident on.
So I kind of just have to say I don't know why that's happening.
I'm probably never going to know why that's happening.
Yes.
That is so basic level.
Are we seeing MPs go up in those models?
So I don't think there's been any more than two or three studies done on this.
The, as far as I'm aware, the the literature extends to showing that this happens both with
exogenous glucocorticoid production and also with sleep loss.
Yeah.
So all I'm saying is you get the same atrophy effects in both of those situations and you get the
same kind of helpful effect of leucine in both of those scenarios.
When I look at immobilization and caloric restriction, I don't see the same benefit.
So it just is one of those things where I can kind of go, you know, I think this is this is an
interesting feature that for me gives me confidence that we are dealing with a unique phenomenon
here, which is, you know, kind of you can draw a circle around and go anything that produces a major
stress response like sleep loss, you know, severe trauma, anything like that, you're going to get a
unique atrophy effect, which is going to have a certain set of features and it's going to be
produced by an increase in muscle protein breakdown rates.
You know, and the important thing here is that, and we'll cover this in a future podcast when we
talk about calorie restriction in more detail, but I don't think you can rescue this with strength
training.
So when we talk about calorie restriction or immobilization situations and you talk about a
suppression of MPSMPS gets suppressed, you can rescue that by inserting a strength training workout
every 48 hours.
So you don't get a problem from the MPs suppression that you're experiencing.
You can get back above baseline by doing a strengthening workout.
I don't think you can do that with this atrophy induced by glucocorticoid.
I think that if you have this problem, you can strengthening workout is literally not influencing it
at all.
Well, my next question is contrasting those two scenarios and what does that actually mean from a
practical standpoint?
And even the example you just gave there, because there's studies where they will have people who
will be whether there's a mobilisation or bed rest or whatever and they'll do a strength training
work out before that, that period of time.
And then you see that it'll mitigate atrophy for you know what is five days or have a test, but
then.
4 tests.
No, no, I'm not saying that.
No, no.
What I mean is the the effect of being bed rested for that five day period.
I think that work out beforehand doesn't that mitigate at the end of that five day period?
They hadn't lost any muscle because of that pre work that work out before that time.
It's two days, the five days, five days.
There is, there is still muscle loss at 5 days.
Yeah, they took two measurements.
So the study you're thinking of, they had a measurement at two days.
I think they had a measurement at 7 days.
OK.
You get atrophy not happening at two days, you're doing the control group without the workout, and
at 7 days you see similar atrophy.
It's a little bit worse in the group that didn't do the strength training workout, but it's still
pretty meaningful.
So what's happening is you get about 48 hour protection.
I don't think you have much more protection after that.
But yeah, I mean, that's the point I'm making.
You get protection by doing strength training from immobilization or caloric restriction situations,
as long as they don't turn into stressors.
But you don't, I don't think, get that from sleep loss.
So I think if somebody's in a sleep loss situation, what's going to happen?
And just to be clear here, if somebody gets a study and they're like, Oh no, I looked at this sleep
deprived or sleep restricted group people and strength training still pushed MPs up and well, yeah,
we'll do.
But you're not doing anything about the MPP situation.
And that's still going to be, you know, kind of exacerbated by the presence of that glucocorticoid
response.
So ultimately I think the strength training is much, much better at dealing with problems of
immobilization or a chloro restriction.
It's really not anywhere near as good at dealing with this vico cortico problem.
So of course, all that means is don't have the problem.
You know, I mean, I've probably said this so many times about all kinds of things, but it's like
people are always asking me, oh, well, how can I recover faster from this workout?
I'm like, don't do a silly workout.
In the 1st place, don't.
Create the problem in the 1st place that that's really what we're talking about here.
You know, this is one of those situations where this is, this is a dragon.
You don't want to antagonize.
Don't take that battle.
You know, don't, don't fight that.
So there's ways to mitigate the effect of of the reduction in MPs, but ultimately we say it's that
increase in the muscle protein breakdown that's.
Much harder to much, much harder to influence, I think.
Yeah.
So what would that mean for an individual who were, say, chronically under sleeping and they were
still training as normal?
So you've got one individual who's training full body three times a week and they're sleeping just
normally just fine.
And you get another individual training full body three times a week and they're always getting 4
hours of sleep.
And that obviously accumulates over time.
What?
In a general sense, it's mainly that they're just going to be stimulating less muscle growth than a
workout by workout basis.
No.
OK, so.
Well, in the sense that like net hypertrophy?
Exactly.
So yeah, in terms of the actual stimulus, it's not going to be affected.
I mean, obviously last week's podcast still applies.
You've got steep induced effects on the workout performance, reduced recruitment, reduced
motivation, all that stuff.
But in terms of the fibres you actually stimulate, no effects.
You're still going to get a bump in MPs, it's still going to do its thing.
What you're just finding is you're running with a constantly higher level of MPB going on in that
ground.
So you're basically just kind of running through treacle.
You're, you're every, you know, you've got a hole in the bath of water you're trying to fill.
You're constantly just seeing all this good stuff just disappearing all the time.
So if you were to plug nothing, you'd be able to, but if you were to look at the the weekly net
stimulus table or what do you call the website you've got?
Yeah, you would.
You would have to accelerate atrophy rates.
You would have to have a bigger atrophy component in the model, yes.
Yeah, interesting.
And so if you were to have that and it's thinking, if I'm visualizing the weekly net stimulus and
thinking, OK, well what's the mean of that atrophy rate is high, ultimately that would suggest that
we would want to train like frequency is probably going to be the most important part of that
equation then.
Yeah.
So, you know, if if somebody were to say that they have a sleep problem and they are, and the first
question I would ask is, OK, so please give me a list of everything that you are currently doing to
address that problem before I go any further.
It's like if they come to me like I'm not doing anything to address it, I'm like, well, go, that's
your priority.
Stop talking to me and go and find somebody who can help you.
You know, like if they're actively addressing the problem, they've got a plan in place and all
they're asking me is, you know, how do I mitigate losses in muscle mass while I am solving my
problem?
OK, fine.
I can answer that question.
It would be like I would look at a minimal volume workout either three times a week or every other
day.
So it would not look different from my standard recommendations to everybody else.
The only thing that I would modify would be that I would actively encourage them to do a minimum
possible volume on every exercise.
So they will be doing single sets and probably leaving a Rep reserve for the reasons that we're
going to talk about in a few minutes when we talk about post workout recovery being affected by
sleep restriction as well.
It's interesting what you said.
They obviously is very similar to not just normal recommendations we might give, but in particular
the specific recommendations we gave 2 episodes back, I think it was when we were talking about
older adults.
And like you said, that might become clear in this next bit we're going to cover.
Yeah.
Before I move on to that, I just want to cover 1 observation, which is I think very important
because you're not going to see anecdotal reports from people who are using anabolics of this
nature.
O If somebody is using anabolics, they are not going to have these problems because essentially the
key factor relating to what's happening here is the balance between the anabolic and the catabolic
hormones.
So if somebody is, so as we've talked about before, if somebody's using anabolics, it has a very
minimal impact on the actual workouts that you're doing.
What it does do is bump up your natural levels of MPs relative to MPB.
So if you imagine you've got somebody who is a natural athlete and they're ticking along and they've
got a workout creating a bit of hypertrophy, and then they lose a little bit before they do the next
workout atrophy.
What's happening with steroid application anabolics is that you just push the NPS up constantly a
little bit higher.
So you're constantly gaining muscle mass in the background.
If you now have somebody who's using anabolics and they're simultaneously experiencing sleep loss,
that cancels each other out.
So your extra MPs is now is now balanced by an extra MPB.
So you're going to find that people who are using anabolics while they're preparing for a
bodybuilding competition and they go, Oh yeah, my sleep was terrible, but it didn't stop me from
getting in condition.
I'm like, you're not joking because because that's how it works, because you've got a constant, you
can literally consider leucocorticoid issues, sleep loss, traumatic injury, stress, that kind of
stuff as being a mirror image catabolic because they literally are cortical steroid.
It is a mirror image of anabolics.
You're literally doing exactly the opposite thing from what you're doing with an anabolic.
So if somebody is on anabolic of any kind, even, you know, probably TRT and they're they're kind of
going, Oh no, no, sleep loss doesn't affect me.
I'm like, not kidding.
Won't do.
It will affect them as as much as.
Your workout performance results and it's still yeah, but they're not going to experience that
atrophy.
They're not because they're balanced out with the anabolic steroids that they're taking.
So again, it's like if you I mean, obviously we kind of all know that fitness industry is, you know
kind of knee deep in antibiotics.
It's there's an open secret, but a lot of these people are going to be responding to this podcast
going, oh, no, no, it's not a big deal.
I've never had any problem.
I sleep really badly, but no kidding, not surprised.
So again, it's like one of these things that, you know, in this in this podcast, we talk about
silver era pre steroid stuff, trying to get to the nuts and bolts of what actually happens
physiologically in human beings without the application of steroids.
For people who are interested in that and how it works.
This is why you're going to see a discrepancy between sleep loss in natural athletes and sleep loss
in, you know, competitive body who are using anabolics you're going to seek or how fitness
influences are using anabolics.
They might not even be, they might not even be competitive body.
The point I'm making is that you can consider this as like a mirror image concept of saying like,
you know, on the one hand, no Panabolics are doing this constant elevation and MPs constant growth
in the background.
You know, Cortico stories are doing the opposite leucocorticoids endogenously doing the same thing
opposite.
They're creating a background in PB effect which is going to gradually create atrophy across the
board.
So it's a really nice symmet sort of symmetry though, and you end up just cancelling each other out
really, if you're in a situation where you've got, you know, somebody who's experiencing both of
those things at the same time.
And then I guess presumably anything that's causing that reduction in MPs, obviously that's not
being cancelled out in the same way, but it's obviously being mitigated against by someone who's
using anabolic.
So obviously like the dieting example, then you've kind of got that extra add on on top anyway.
Yeah, sure.
So that's what I had to say about the atrophy side of things.
So I'll move on to recovery unless you have any other questions you want me to answer.
No.
I think do the recovery and then we'll see if there's how we can tie it all together at the end.
Cool.
So basically there's two things to consider here when it comes to the the the batch of
glucocorticoid inducers and whether it's sleep loss, stress, whatever.
Essentially on the one hand you've got a suppression of NPS.
So straight away and actually a suppression of M Tor signalling as well.
So straight away you kind of know that you're going to see a slower rate of muscle damage repair
because muscle damage repair depends on MPs and M Tor the same way that I put it depends on MPs and
M Tor.
So, you know, This is why I wanted to cover recovery at the same time as recovery as covering, you
know, kind of atrophy because it's essentially the same, you know, channels getting to the same
place.
I mean, interestingly, in the webinar yesterday, a number of people were coming up with, you know,
analogies to try and explain this to other people in the chat.
So for example, one, one guy said, well, you know, can we think of this as like economic activity?
Maybe, you know, like you might find that the economic activity of a, of a, of a nation or a state
or a place, you know, measured by GDP is really high.
But actually that's because they had a natural disaster and they had to spend an enormous amount of
time repairing all this stuff, but they didn't.
That's not economically productive because you just repair what you've lost.
So you just get yourself back to square 1.
Whereas the other part of the GDP could actually be building robots or something.
I mean, you've got to look below the surface and go.
I thought it was really interesting analogy.
It's trying to get show people that getting yourself back to square one after a disaster is not the
same thing as building new stuff, changing things.
So same thing with the hypertrophy and and muscle damage repair.
You use M Tor and MPs to get you to a repaired fibre, but you also use it to get you to a a new size
of growth of the fibre, almost indistinguishable, if not indistinguishable with our current
technologies.
And there's another, I mean, there's a very various analogies you can use, but I thought that was
pretty, pretty cool.
And I didn't think of that.
That was in the chat in the conversation yesterday on the women.
So that's another reason for people to attend and actually listen to these, you know, sort of.
Sort of sort of backwards and back and forths that we're sort of getting in these webinars.
So yeah, First things first, you've got a slower rate to most damage repair.
Secondly, and this is the interesting bit, we were talking about this before we came on the podcast
today.
If you look at the way the inflammatory process works in the post workout period, glucocorticoids
change the shape of the curve.
So in a sort of situation where you haven't got the glucocorticoid, what you get is a relatively big
spike in inflammation, you know, 24 hours post workout that then goes away again fairly rapidly.
If you look instead at a situation with a corticoid where you get is a much smaller spike that lasts
a much longer period of time.
So you squash the inflammatory response and you spread it out over a longer duration, which is
exactly what the intention of exogenous cord cord actually is.
It's like we're trying to suppress inflammation because the inflammation itself got the point where
it's problematic.
So that's why you generally find people take those things or not.
Generally it's like it's one of the reasons why people, you know, we prescribe those kind of things
is because they're trying to create a suppression of the inflammatory response which is creating
other issues secondary to the original problem.
But in the case of endogenous gluca cortical, you get the same effect.
You get this suppression of the peak and a longer duration of the cortisol or whatever response and
also of the sorry of the inflammatory response and also therefore of the repair processors.
And as we were talking about before, of course, it's actually the same phenomenon that you see in
older people.
So older people have a slower, longer inflammatory response.
Their muscle damage repair takes longer, again, dysregulation in respective of that of that repair
process.
So that is why based there's two reasons why you're going to get slow recovery from your
strengthening workouts when you have sleep, insufficient sleep in the back.
So if you were to have, let's talk from a practical standpoint here.
So let's say, you know, I gave the example before, I've got two people following a plan, one person
sleeping adequately, one person sleeping 4 hours a night or whatever.
So you've mentioned, OK, what we would want to do is look at reducing volume down to perhaps just
one set per exercise or per muscle, you know, potentially keeping a Rep reserve if that was
necessary as well.
And that's going to speak to the recovery issue you've just identified there.
So it's not that we necessarily want to cause less of a stimulus, it's that we're just trying to
mitigate, hey, this recovery is potentially going to blow out and then you're not going to be able
to train again 48 hours later, correct?
So that's one adjustment.
That one person there.
Again, obviously the best adjustment here would be to actually look at how do I make my sleep
better.
But, you know, if that for whatever reason that was not happening, then in terms of adjusting the
training plan, that would be one thing, that one that someone would look at doing.
Obviously all the other factors we had, muscle damage is going to apply here as well.
Yeah.
So we're going to look at like, you know, total repetitions.
We're going to look at muscle positions and the exercise, all this kind of stuff that we would have
talked about a million times.
Yeah.
Is there anything else specific from a workout perspective that you think would be worth adjusting?
So any of the variables that affect post workout muscle damage are going to be relevant.
So there's five key variables.
So obviously a volume is 1.
We've already mentioned we've also got Rep ranges.
So if your Rep ranges are creeping upwards, then you know, you could dial those back a little bit to
have your loading.
You could also leave a Rep or two more in reserve.
So proximity to failure is worth looking at.
And then of course you could look at your eccentric phases, you know, normally doing slow ones or
anything like that.
And then stretch positions.
So, you know, can you consider whether that's super necessary to include super stretch positions and
everything you do?
Honestly, most people aren't going to change much of that stuff.
It's mainly going to be the volume, maybe a Rep in reserve extra from what they normally do, you
know, and maybe they might just kind of take the top end off the Rep ranges if they're drifting up
towards the 10 and 12 end of the Rep range, maybe just kind of push it back down towards the fives
and sixes and sevens.
But other than that, I think really volume is the key.
Is the key thing that is adjustable in those situations.
It's interesting.
I actually get this question relatively often from people who are, you know, maybe going through
busy periods at university or school or college, whatever, or maybe with work.
And one of the observations that these people often make is that they're unable to maintain the same
amount of volume per like it's not not necessarily per workout, but, you know, per muscle.
Yeah.
And generally what I hear people suggest in terms of like, I'll get the client feeding this back to
me and I'd be like, OK, therefore this is what I want to do.
And the suggestion they come up with usually is I want to drop off a workout I want to do.
I want to keep the same volume of being doing, but I want.
To you're trolling me now on him.
You're deliberately trolling me because you know that I'm going to.
Well, yeah, OK.
So, so give it to us.
What's your what's your response to that?
So reducing frequency is absolutely not the right answer.
I would always reduce workout volumes.
Even so, I've got no problem with people doing 2 workouts a week if they're super busy and if you've
got loads and loads of stuff on, I would always First things first, get the workout volumes right
back to even single sets.
And if that is too much still, then two workouts a week with single sets is still OK.
Still move forward with that.
But I would never jump straight away to the reduced frequency option unless the complaint is not
really about recovery, is actually about scheduling.
If the complaint is about scheduling, then that's irrelevant.
We're not describing a problem that relates to workout recovery anymore or we're describing as a
problem that we just can't fit the workouts in the week.
So if the person who goes I literally can't fit 3 workouts in a week, well then we're not having a
conversation about Physiology anymore, are we?
No, no.
But if the conversation's about Physiology, then it's always go from higher workout volumes to
smaller workout volumes and keep frequency at three times a week or every other day, whatever you're
doing.
And then if that's not working and you're still not recovering, fine, then you can drop back 2 * a
week.
I actually really like to work out a week with single sets for, you know, the, the extreme ends of
the spectrum.
People are really, really, you know, super busy and can't do anything other than just what they can
literally run into the gym and do and then run out again.
And for older people who've got all the time in the world but just can't recover, you know, I think
that that's a fantastic solution for both groups, those people, but it's not the one I'm just going
to run to straight away.
You know, I think standard three times a week single sets is great.
Yeah, yeah.
It's is interesting how much of an impact this can theoretically have on someone.
And because it's not just, we're not just talking about one's natural ability to recover.
You know, obviously there's some people like, oh, you know, you recover slower, you recover faster.
What are they?
We're not talking about that.
We're talking about actual change within that individual because again, I'll hear this from, from
clients where they'll be like, well, during these periods of time, I'm fine, I'm recovering just
fine.
And I'm able to do the three sets per exercise, whatever.
And then those same people will tell me over semester or whatever that they simply can't recover
anymore.
And people, I think underestimate the impacts of this stuff can have.
There was, and I'm sure you've seen this study, it was in undergraduate students where they, they
got them just to self assess their stress levels and then they got them to do, it was high volume.
It was like 7 sets of of 10 or leg press or something like that.
But they measured recovery and they found that those who were assessing themselves higher stress
levels took it was like I think what 72 or 96 hours to recover.
Whereas generally those who were assessing self assessing as, as low stress levels.
We recovered I think 48 hours later.
Now, you know, obviously this is self-assessment and whatnot, but.
You can get the same thing at rodents.
You can get the same thing in rodents without self-assessment because in experimental models of
rodents, you can actually stress them out.
Yeah, it's considered ethical to do that.
So they are, they're allowed to impose a stressor on the on the rodent for a period of time and then
and then have a, an expert, an exercise induced muscle damage protocol and then measure recovery
after that protocol and you get exactly the same effect.
It's not.
Self-assessment is not a limiting factor here, because we see the same thing without it.
Sort of timeline, are we seeing like a like a doubling what, what do you sort of see in those
studies, you know?
Well, I mean, again, I mean, this is a question that I'm going to answer the same way.
This is the type of question that I'm always going to answer the same way.
Physiology doesn't necessarily give you clear numerical differences between things.
It gives you directions.
So, you know, directionally, yeah, the more stress somebody's under, the bigger the problem is going
to be.
So it's just going to come down to, you know, a mild stress or it's going to create a small effect.
The bigger stress or should create a bigger effect.
Sure.
And you know, potentially the effect can.
Be quite large.
Well, if you push this right up to the top end of the spectrum where you've got traumatic injury
situations and hypercortisolemia, yeah, it can be absolutely ridiculous.
You know, how long is a, you know, a piece of string?
It's like, and everybody is going to interpret these situations slightly differently.
You know, some people are going to interpret a situation as incredibly stressful.
Somebody else is not going to interpret that same situation as very stressful.
I mean, just to give a very simple example, which is not a big stressor at all.
But I can, you know, show up to a webinar like we did yesterday and and chat in front of a couple
100 people and my heart rate barely blips, you know, but I can see just as I'm prepping for the
webinar with my Co host that he's not as comfortable as I am.
And that's, you know, just a, you know, kind of a what you're accustomed to experiencing.
So, you know, but that everybody's going to experience stressors in different ways according to what
they're accustomed to, you know, so, and I think that's really useful to just understand is like
within that group of college students, there would have been people who objectively probably were
facing challenges that would have stressed other people out a lot.
But we're actually handling them pretty well.
And the point is that many, if not the vast majority of genuine stressors are actually things that
we have to perceive as stressors before the other factors in that way.
One of the things that causes problems in animal models where you're trying to measure the effects
of, you know, like for years, for example, people thought that exercise was a stressor.
I mean, you still find this all over the Internet.
Oh, yeah.
That that if I include exercise in my program, that's an extra stressor.
No, it's not.
Yeah, one of the biggest base I had with so the the natural health world and you know, the space I
sort of play in a lot is people will often talk about not giving a client training who has maybe any
health issues or any, any sort of, you know, stress issues.
You don't want to add stress on top of anything.
That's just not.
A stressor.
And the reason, one of the reasons we believed that exercise was a stressor because we're using
animal models without controlling for the effects of the experiment.
So for example, you'd have an experiment where they would go in and they would grab a rat out of the
cage, stick it on a treadmill, poke with a stick until they ran.
And then they get, oh, look, the exercise is a stressor.
And like if you grab me from like on high and dump me on hope stick to and I'd be pretty stressed as
well.
So now they've got models that don't do do that.
They they have protocols of careful handling where the rats become accustomed to being handled
regularly and they don't get stressed out by that.
And they get accustomed to running on the treadmill.
So they don't get stressed out by that and then not then stressed out when you get to the point of
doing the experiment later on.
And so you we've introduced protocols that get around that problem, but for many years we didn't
know that.
And so we were stressing these creatures out and unnecessarily and then getting a stress response
and going, oh, look, the animals are really stressed.
Like, yeah, no kidding.
So we've got to be aware that, you know, there's, there's effects of of the experiment.
If you don't understand it, they're going to create issues for us in interpreting some of these
things that we're looking at.
There's, I'm not going to mention specifically what they are because that's not the point of this,
but there's, there's two supplement studies I'm aware of that I'm kicking back, kicking me out of my
mind where they use these particular supplements with all the adults.
And they don't influence training or lifestyle, exercise, anything like that.
And what they identify is reduction in cortisol, but they're actually associated with a significant
increase in muscle mass.
And yeah, and, and basically, yeah.
Well, I mean, again, you've talked about, well, what if because they're not accounting for diet in
this study either, right.
So I'm thinking, well, OK, maybe there's an effect of the cortisol on even dietary intake.
And then maybe we're seeing dietary intake go up and, you know, maybe that's having an impact there
as well.
But it is interesting that they could potentially be something from a supplement standpoint that
maybe could have some, some application, I guess, and some of the stuff we've talked about.
But again, you know, obviously fixing asleep is going to be the main thing there to play with as
opposed to trying to, I mean, it's, it's like that with anything we talk about.
Yeah.
Like people want to try to find ways to hack kind of what the body's naturally doing.
It's like, well maybe we just don't do the thing that's causing that response in the 1st place as
opposed to trying to outsmart it and usually and the up second best anyway.
Absolutely.
No.
I mean, as I said, I that's my approach with strength training.
This approach with all of this, you know, Physiology is, is it works the way it works for good
reasons.
You know, if you start trying to think that you're cleverer than it, then you're going to end up
getting into trouble.
It's not going to, you know, work out very well for you.
So I think it's much better idea to yeah, fix the problem rather than trying to work around it.
But yeah, so.
Can I ask, so if you had an individual then who was and maybe touched on this yesterday on the
webinar, I'm not sure because I was in bed at 4:00 AM one at the time.
But if you had an individual who was dieting and also had issues with sleep, chronically insomniac
or whatever is it?
I mean, obviously we're going to see this.
They're going to be.
Pretty miserable.
Yeah, they're going to be pretty miserable.
But is there anything, is anything worth noting in those particular cases?
I mean, I guess it's all going to come back to what we've mentioned anyway from a training
perspective is any, any sort of any special, I guess that's happening in that sort of combination of
effects.
Well, I mean, you know, really what it comes back to is probably taking a step back and going, do I
need to put this diet on hold while I fix this sleep problem?
And then when I fix the sleep problem and then go back to the project of dieting, you know, I mean,
that's, that's broadly the answer we gave on the webinar yesterday when we had similar kind of
questions.
It's like, you know, just just don't, don't try and fight 2 battles at the same time because.
Essentially it is 2 battles.
Like that's basically what we're saying in that combination.
Don't, don't do that, you know, kind of retreat, regroup, start again, fight the battle that you
that it's creating the problem and then go and fight the battle that you're, you know, interested in
fighting originally.
Essentially, it's two separate problems.
Trying to fight them both at the same time is really, really hard.
So fix the sleep 1 and then go and do the diet.
I would do it.
You know, I mean, we have a number of questions where people were saying, you know, what if I've got
this kind of, or we gave some hypotheticals around what people are approaching with a fixed date in
mind and that's too short a period of time to really, you know, get it done.
It's like, no, don't do that.
Set a better competition date, give yourself more time.
It's the same.
It's the same answer.
It's like, don't try and do something that's, you know, kind of.
I mean, honestly, this sleep thing, obviously there's all kinds of reasons people have poor sleep,
but like, you know, in my experience, I work with stacks of clients who have poor sleep and 90 plus
percent of the time this is not a hard thing to fix.
You know, obviously if they've taken care of sleep hygiene, that's going to be at least 50% of it.
And then with a couple of supplementation fixes, a couple of interventions, usually people can get
on top of this if they're actually interested in it.
So it doesn't feel to me the kind of thing where most people need to look at it and be like, oh, I
need to delay dieting by 6 months while I work at my sleep.
It's like, well hang on, this is probably.
A.
It takes as long as it takes, Yeah.
I mean, it could be a three-week problem.
It could, you know, who knows, But yeah, I think the definitive answer is don't try and fight both
battles at the same time.
But not just because it's going to make it harder, like there's actually from a because.
You won't actually succeed.
You won't actually succeed because what's going to happen is you're just going to hemorrhage muscle
mass.
It's just going to drop off you.
Yeah.
So we're not just saying it's going to make the fat loss harder, it's going to make whatever harder.
Work.
No, no, no, no, no.
It's actually not going to happen.
Yeah, like it's, it's actually going to cause you problems.
This is, this is not, not a good idea.
You're not just making life harder if you're causing problems.
Yeah, you're actually.
Going to not achieve your goal if you try and fight both battles at the same time.
Yeah, Yeah.
I think that's a, that's an important message because I think people might think, you know what, I
understand it's harder.
Sorry again.
Again, none of this applies if the person is using.
Is on analogs, yeah, sure, yeah, yeah.
Which is probably why this message is actually very important because as you pointed out, people
might be looking at, you know, people online at bodybuilders whatever and thinking well it's not a
problem for them.
I didn't need to out will myself out of it and actually suck it up and I whatever it's like, well,
my hand on your Physiology here is actually a little bit different.
OK, there's there's actually a fair bit in that.
Who would have thought?
Sleep deprivation.
Yeah.
I mean, I've never really never really gone into it before.
So it was, it was a great pleasure to just work through a set of studies that have been done really
well and, you know, thoughtfully and arriving at a really nice hypothesis that's very explanatory.
You know, I'm kind of, and it happens a lot when I go into Physiology and I sort of sideways from an
area that I'm already very familiar with.
And I find a group of people are working on something really interesting and they've done a really
good job.
And I come back to our poetry research and I'm just like banging my head against the wall.
It's just so bad in comparison, the dogma and the just willful blindness of ignoring things like
fatigue and, you know, kind of soccer genesis research and that kind of stuff.
They're just determined not to include anything other than their own pet theories.
Whereas, you know, you when you find an area of Physiology research that's been well done, it's such
an enjoyment.
So yeah, it was fun to go through and, and and piece all that together.
So I will be doing the same thing with caloric restriction as I presented on the webinar yesterday.
We'll do it in a podcast coming up.
And we'll also do some more stuff on that MPSMPB interactions because there's more to say on that as
well.
I think again for people who've listened to this, it would be interesting to go back to the weekly
that stimulus model play with.
Obviously you know there's no hard and fast numbers here for atrophy, but just think about or
conceptualize what does this influence if the atrophy number was a little bit higher there?
Yeah.
All they have to do is bump the maintenance volume up so that the atrophy.
Well, that's exactly what I was thinking there because ultimately this you would expect this to
change the maintenance volume.
Yeah.
So you could bump the maintenance volume up to like, you know, 10 sets.
I don't know if the model will let you do that.
Actually.
I'd have to ask the creator because I didn't code it, but you know, you could theoretically bump the
maintenance volume up to 10 or something like that and that'll give you a faster atrophy rate.
Yeah, that's truly interesting thinking about it from a maintenance perspective, because we kind of
just assume, Oh yeah, you know, three sets will maintain three to four sets is is going to be
maintenance in basically everyone whatever.
But actually, yeah, there could be some scenarios where that simply won't be true.
Planning to think about.
OK, thank you guys for joining us.
Hopefully.
Yeah, hopefully that's stimulating some thoughts and you guys.
And if you are struggling with sleep, I guess this is your encouragement to actually think about
what you're going to do about it.
And maybe not just not just, you know, try to out will your way through it or have more coffee or
whatever.
Not that I'm against coffee, but there's definitely things you can do to support your sleep.
OK, Thank you for joining us.
And we hope you'll join us again next week for another episode.