Episode: 027 Are 4 reps optimal?! New study: stimulating reps vs volume load
URL: https://open.spotify.com/episode/55pB4bULmXP3cyuOAQ6Sa7
Published: 2025-11-23
================================================================================

Welcome back to another episode.
Thank you everyone for joining us.
I'm joined by my Co host professional full time, Chris Pearsley.
How are you doing this week?
I'm doing well.
Thanks, Jake.
Not quite so many podcasts this week.
I actually do that many.
It's just, I had a last week, I had three in one weekend, so it's a bit bit crazy, but only two this
weekend.
So normal, normal levels of podcasting behaviour.
So today we have a totally wholly different approach for you guys, something I've never talked about
on this podcast series before, and we're more than six months in.
This is episode 27.
So thank you to anyone who's been with us for the journey so far.
Now obviously you guys know that I normally start the show with a silver era plan, so a bodybuilding
plan from before anabolic steroids were being used in bodybuilding.
And today I'm doing something a little bit differently.
Now I am still talking about someone that you will know.
So last week we talked about Bill Pearl.
Now for you guys who did listen to last week's episode, I mentioned that Bill Pearl is an
interesting figure because he he was active actually for quite a long time.
So he won Miss the universes in the 50s and 60s and even in the early 70s, and he transitioned in
this period where anabolics were being introduced.
So when he first won his first Mr. Universe, he was natural and anabolics were not widely being
used.
And then shortly after winning, he started using anabolics.
And if you do look up his physique transformation, you'll see that obviously he had a very
impressive physique when he was natural.
But then you Fast forward a few years and he kind of looks completely different.
But it's an interesting case study, not just to see how his physique has changed or did change over
that time, but to see how his training methods changed over that time as well.
So last week we covered a plan that he discussed when he was still natural.
And this week we are covering a plan from 1967 and he started using anabolics most likely around
1958.
So this is about a decade obviously after that.
And I'm going to do my best to communicate this plan to you because you'll see or you'll hear in a
moment that there's quite a bit to it.
So it's a 2 two way split, OK.
And he, he was doing six days a week.
So we've got a Monday, Wednesday, Friday workout and we've got a Tuesday, Thursday, Saturday
workout.
So I'll start with the, the workout a the Monday, Wednesday, Friday.
And we have a, we start with an alternating twisting sit up into a incline leg tuck and then into a
incline dumbbell sit up and actually also a dumbbell bend to opposite foot.
So we've got this kind of cool work there.
He's doing a single set of each of these exercises, doing 100 repetitions.
So you know, obviously very high volume there with this sort of corn AB work.
Then we go into an incline lateral raise, four sets into a close grip chin up for four sets, a bent
arm lateral raise for another four sets, a medium grip chin up for another four sets, a decline
lateral raise for another four sets, a wide grip chin up for another four sets, and then a military
press for another four sets.
So that's what's that, like 4 eighths?
What do we got here?
Like 1216 sets of pull ups?
I think it is in in that sort of little, little series.
Then we're not done yet.
We're then going to weighted dips, four sets of eight, press behind the next.
Actually, we've got a little bit more delts happening, another four sets.
And then incline barbell biceps curls, 4 sets, standing dumbbell latch arrays, a little bit more
delts, another four sets.
And then finally finishing off exercise #16 we've got decline dumbbell bicep curls stand for another
four sets.
So that is our work out.
A.
Now if you're do you want to jump in and make a comment on that?
I wasn't going to make a comment so much as just ask for clarification of what, you know, what do we
think this what parts of the body is is he targeting with this exercise?
I'm obviously we've you've described, you know, pull ups and lateral raises and all kinds of stuff
in there.
But can you summarize for us?
Because I'm just hearing this information.
I'm going, you know, how do I pause this?
It's so much data, but what muscle groups are we training here?
It's difficult to fully identify this split because obviously we had a lot of bicep work here, but
we will have bicep work again on the following day.
OK.
So we, we had bicep, we had a stack of of deltoid work, We had obviously a stack of back work as
well.
And then we had our core work.
Now that's predominantly, I guess, what we see there.
So there's not really much PEC work in there as such.
It's.
Not as that.
We put a dip in there and that's about it.
Yeah.
So it's it's, I guess triceps, shoulders, biceps.
Cool.
And.
Back, yeah.
So then our Tuesday, Thursday, Saturday workout.
So this is where we've got legs, but we've got biceps again, we've still got some delts, but it's
more rear delts.
And then we still got our core work in there as well and carves as well.
So basically all the lower body stuff and then some some upper body stuff.
So this workout again, we're starting with core and ABS.
So we've got a setup, one set of 100 reps and alternating leg raise, a dumbbell side bend, and then
a lying leg crossover.
So one set of each of those for 100 repetitions.
And then we go to a standing dumbbell curl for four sets, a incline rear delt raise for four sets,
incline dumbbell curl for four sets.
We've got so much bicep work.
A lying rear delt raise for four sets.
Bent over delt cable raise four sets.
Leg ext 4 sets.
This is 4 sets to 10.
Everything else was 4 set to date and then standing.
This is interesting.
Standing calf areas.
We've got five sets of 15, so we have moved UA little bit in the repetitions there.
A hat squat for four sets, a seated calf raise now for five sets, a hamstring curl for four sets,
and then finally a calf raise or I guess more like a toy press, a calf raised done in the late press
machine.
And that was five sets.
And you know what, you were talking about chess before and that there wasn't really any in the first
workout and we've got none in this workout.
So we're very much missing apart from I guess whatever he's getting in the dips and a little bit of
upper chest and some of the overhead work, there's not any significant chess work.
From memory though, there was in his previous program.
I'm just trying to recall what we talked about.
Yeah.
So that was a that was obviously one that he'd written for people to follow.
But yeah, I believe there was a, there was a wide grip bench in that one and an incline.
And the fly man, he what he did is he put all of his chess work 10 years prior and then apparently
excluded over 10 years later.
Yeah, that's really, really interesting.
It's, I mean, obviously the first thing that anybody is going to think when they when they kind of
hear this, that's just an absolutely incredibly high degree of workout volume.
But also, you know, this is happening six days a week, you know, got Monday, Wednesday, Friday
workouts and Tuesday, Thursday, Saturday workouts.
It's just a colossal amount of a volume being done, you know, not just single sessions but you know,
constantly.
So obviously it doesn't fit into the recovery date that we've got for strength trained people.
So, you know, there's kind of two perspectives that we can we can bring to that.
You know, obviously historically people have argued that anabolics do accelerate recovery.
They we do know that.
And whether they do or not is actually really difficult to track because essentially, if you imagine
you're in the post workout recovery period and you're trying to track whether someone's strength is
recovering faster because they're using an anabolic versus when they're not using an anabolic.
The problem is that the anabolic is going to cause hypertrophy in that in that recovery period.
So the fibers are going to grow go faster due to the anabolic usage and they're going to get
stronger in that post workout period whether or not the fibers that you damaged are recovering
faster or not.
So it's a really, really difficult sort of thing to track.
So what you have to do is go and look at the non exercise muscle injury.
And people hate to when I do this, but it's the easiest way of just seeing whether something happens
and go do the data in anabolic suggests that non exercise muscle injury recovers faster and some
data do and some data don't.
So, but I think, you know, on balance, I mean, I used to say that I don't think it does make a
difference.
I think it probably does make a little bit of difference.
But at the end of the day, it is a very, very difficult problem to solve because you can't actually
control for the repairing effects of anabolic at the same time as you know, you can't exclude the,
you know, hyper the hypertrophic effects of anabolics while you're trying to investigate the
repairing effects of anabolics in an exercise situation.
So you actually have to use non exercise muscle injury to give you informative data.
Do I think the anabolics accelerate recovery to the point where you could do a workout plan like
this and recover from it?
No, I don't.
I don't think the effect is anywhere near that.
Yeah.
I mean, essentially like just on that first workout, we're looking at this from a dealt perspective.
We've got 4A12 1620, we've got 24 sets of doubts and then that's going to be repeated again two days
later with even potentially a little bit of crossover from the following day.
So even with the assistance of anabolic 24 sets in 48 hours, it's just not going to happen, is it?
No, not at all.
And I think, you know, this is a really good opportunity to repeat what I've said before, which is
that one of the central points that we're trying to make in this podcast series is that the high
volume approach to strength training only appeared at the point when anabolics became popular.
So the people who argue that high volume works for everybody, you know, whether they're using
anabolics or not, are requiring us to believe that simultaneously.
At the point when people start using anabolics, a group of people who are using anabolics
simultaneously magically discovered the high volumes are with the answer to maximum hypertrophy.
They're asking us to believe that that is a likely possibility.
The far more likely possibility is that, you know, people started using anabolics and at that point
it didn't really make any difference what kind of strength training you do as you're going to grow
the anabolics.
You don't need the strength training now to provide growth because the anabolic can do that.
And just to be clear, what I'm saying here is that anabolics provide a completely separate parallel
stimulus for muscle growth at the same time as the strength training is doing for people who taking
anabolics are going to grow no matter what they do.
They could sit on the sofa, and we've got studies showing that you can literally sit on the sofa and
grow.
So ultimately, it's really, really hard to see the effects of the strength training program that
you're doing.
What's interesting is trying to get to the bottom of why did they decide to start doing higher
volumes at the same time as they started introducing otherwise, what was it that made them think
that that was useful?
And I can understand responses.
Well, I'm not sure there's anything.
It's just that, you know, they're growing like a weed no matter what they do.
So it they lose the connection between the empirical observation of what's happening when they're
doing a strengthening workout.
It's like, you know, before, before animals were introduced, if you did something that didn't work,
you got feedback from that, you know, because.
It literally didn't work and there's nothing else didn't work They're.
Gonna work At the same time, once you start using analytics that that that feedback loop is broken.
You know, so you could literally go to the gym and stand on one leg for half an hour and believe
that that was somehow doing something for you because you were going to grow anyway.
Now, I don't think that necessarily training in a way that is, you know, suboptimal is going to be
completely compensated for bianabolics.
What I'm saying is that you are breaking the feedback loop and you can therefore do stuff that
doesn't work and you're not necessarily going to know that it's not working because you're going to
be growing.
So it's like, do I think that somebody with who's taking anabolics can literally do whatever they
want?
Well, yes and no.
Yes, they're still going to grow, but no, they would probably grow slightly faster if they trained
in a in a more appropriate way.
So I still think that people who are using anabolics for bodybuilding would benefit from training in
a way that is, you know, kind of similar to what we described before in silver area bodybuilding.
But they aren't going to necessarily know that that is a better way just by observing their own
training over shortish periods of time.
Maybe if they look at it over a year, they might start to notice a difference if they do one year
training in this way and then actually a training in a silver area way.
I think they might notice that the way training in a silver area way is going to be better, but it's
going to be very dependent on them using the exact same kind of pharmaceutical assistance as they
were using in a previous year.
Talked about this on on on the webinar that I did with Asia and we said, you know, one of the things
that really are going to notice is just how miserable the process of competition prep is going to
be.
You know, I think somebody who's training in a in this kind of way is going to have a very miserable
experience, whereas somebody's training in a more silver era type way is going to have a much more
enjoyable experience prepping for competition because they're not going to be going to the gym
doing, you know, 2 1/2 hours worth of work, you know, to get to essentially a worse output than they
would have done if they'd trained.
And of course, the conditioning and and that kind of side of things is going to be more easy to
obtain when you're not doing a ton of unnecessary stuff on these kind of crazy volumes.
So I think there are going to be discernible differences, but I don't think that feedback loop, I
think ultimately the breaking of that feedback loop is the is the reason why we've seen all of this
crazy stuff starting to happen at this particular point in time.
Yeah, yeah, I think entirely like I often and you know actually I want to make a point here.
A big issue I see when I do see people talking about silver or talking about not even a silver era,
talking about old school bodybuilding.
Yeah, what I see is almost every time I see it being talked about, people want it all together.
And they lump in silver era with golden era.
And so they, they look at plans like what we've talked about for the last six months and then they
look at plans like this and there's no distinction of, Hey, this is a post anabolic plan compared
to, you know, pre anabolic plan.
And this sort of this whole mentality of, hey, these guys sort of knew something that we don't.
And you know, there's like this intuition that I had and this and the other, and this is a perfect
example of actually know what you've identified there.
Without that, that feedback loop working, they we start to see some simply nuts stuff happening.
What I love about this example here with Bill Pearl is we can get a first hand experience of what
did it look like before he started taking anabolics.
What did it look like afterwards?
And literally he more than doubled everything he was doing.
You know, I've just pulled up another plan of his I have, which was a plan that he personally
followed and very similar exercise selection, but it's literally 30 to 50% as much volume.
So he's just gone ahead and taken almost exactly what he was doing and doubled or more and also
doubled the amount of days that he's training.
And you know, this is this is such a good example of, hey, even within this one individual who is
getting amazing results doing kind of the classic stuff we've been talking about in the episodes up
until now.
He still I guess kind of was unable to identify what training approach worked best once he has this
interfering factor of anabolics that were causing an additional type of growth.
Totally.
I think it really strains, you know, our ability to believe people when they say that high volume
training is going to work in everybody, you know, no matter whether they're using other works or
not.
And yet the only time of the point in history where high volume training became popular was exactly
the point at which, you know, anabolics start to becoming used popularly.
It just is such an obvious inflection point in in the trajectory of training practices.
You know, we just look at the graphic training practices over time.
Suddenly, like, you know, the late 50s, early 60s, people started doing double the amount of volume
they were doing before.
And we're supposed to believe that that's just, you know, suddenly people discovered that that was a
good way of training, despite the fact that people have been lifting heavy objects since the ancient
Greeks.
You know, now suddenly at this precise moment in history, everyone starts doing double the amount of
volume they were doing before.
And oh, look, that's exactly the point in time when anabolics become popular.
Nobody who has any degree of, you know, cognitive capacity is going to look at that and get all
those two events unrelated, totally unrelated.
I mean, come on, be serious.
You know, everyone, everyone who thinks about this stuff seriously has got to look at that and get
all those two things are linked.
And if we accept that those two things are linked, we suddenly now just completely undercut all of
the nonsense in the industry about people running around going, oh, you've got to do super high
volumes and look, you know, there's no muscle swelling going on.
And all of that nonsense that we see being talked about all the time, it's clearly that people start
using anabolics to feedback loop broke.
Now we don't know what works and what doesn't work.
And so people start chasing all kinds of silly ideas.
And maybe, maybe, I mean, I'm not a, I'm not a student of steroid biochemistry.
I don't know about this stuff anywhere near as much as some.
There's some very commentators out there on the Internet, you know, but I'd be surprised if they
don't change, you know, your mood, your approach to workouts, how you feel, all that kind of thing.
And, you know, if people feel like they want to do more and they're feeling great, you know they're
going to do more.
So, you know, maybe there's a behavioural kind of driver there just because of the way that the the
steroid hormone makes you feel.
But ultimately, you know, none of that really matters.
What matters is that, you know, if you just look at the prevalence of different training programs
over time, the only point in history where high volume programs became popular was exactly the point
at which steroids became popular as well.
Anybody who's got any kind of, you know, analytical capacity is going to look at that and go all
those two events related.
It's not one of those situations where you can kind of go, oh, well, no, correlation doesn't mean
causation.
I'm like, OK, come on, be serious.
This is clearly what's one thing is clearly driving the other.
So this plan was obviously different to anything else we've covered so far.
And going forwards, I want to present a few more plans like this.
I still want to show you guys examples of Silver area plans and what they did and why we think it
makes sense.
Or you know what maybe could have been done better.
But for you guys who've been joining us for this long, you'll see that you know what, there's
actually so much consistency in what they were doing.
It's a little bit monotonous.
It's like, OK, we kind of get it now.
And now what I want to do going forward is contrast a little bit to, well, what do we see develop
when that feedback loop was broken and how did it differ?
So it's not always going to be a golden era plan like this.
So I will still introduce you guys to some silver era plans in future episodes, but we will do a
little bit more of this contrasting going forwards.
Is there any other points you wanted to make on this plan before we jump into the topic for today?
No, I just.
I guess wanted to say that, yeah, commenting on what you just mentioned there.
It'll be really interesting to see if there are any trends, like we've observed trends in the silver
era, some of them which are clearly in alignment with Physiology and some of them are like, why were
they doing like I just keep saying, why are there no pull ups in this program?
Why are there no, no frontal plane, you know, kind of pulling exercises in this program?
You know, I keep saying why they know hamstrings exercises in these programs?
Why aren't they doing any deadlift variations or do they just not talk about them?
Is this some sort of secret?
Like I've joked before, there's some kind of secret agreement that they don't comment on deadlift
exercises like they're doing them and they're just not talking about them.
So we've got this kind of weird kind of trends that we've noticed having gone through all of those
programs week, week in, week out.
Are we going to see the same kind of thing?
Like, you know, looking at this program we talked about today, are we going to find that everyone's
doing a billion delt exercises and no chest exercises?
Is that going to be.
I doubt that, but you know, is that something that we're going to start to see coming through as a
trend?
I doubt that as well.
I.
Think I don't know my bill power?
I have a suspicion.
There's going to be a lot of doubt and biceps exercises in most people's.
Do you think OK?
Well see the interesting thing here actually is because Bill's natural plan was super light on with
chess and actually really heavy on the delts as well.
So I wonder if it might just be.
A a feature of his personal kind of weak points and preferences and that kind of thing.
Yeah.
No, no, I agree.
We will find out.
This is interesting to try.
I have a suspicion.
To what we're going to say, and I'm not going to say I'll tell you when we finish recording, but but
I think, yeah, there's something I think that that will appear, which I think will be quite
interesting for us to note on.
Well, it'll come up cool.
Let's see what.
Happens so today.
Hello.
Yeah.
So basically today I just want to introduce a potential new development, which is not something that
I do very often because I think that physiologically we've, we've kind of been in a relatively
stable place as regards strength training and how it works for a number of years.
I don't think there's been anything really new to get our teeth into.
We do have a, a new study, I think it was probably published ahead of print, maybe even as long ago
as 6 to 12 months, but it came out in a printed version in August.
But I was kind of on vacation in August, as most Europeans tend to be, so I didn't spot it and I
only picked it up recently and worked my way through it.
Basically it's a long term training study and it's the first long term training study we've got
which compared the hypertrophy after heavy loads and light loads.
Depending on your terminology, you might listen to that and go, what are you talking about?
We've got a whole kind of load of studies that have compared heavy and light loads and hypertrophy.
And that's not actually true if you use the strict definitions of heavy and light.
Heavy basically is 1 to 5 Rep Max is moderate is 6 to 15 and light is kind of 16 to maybe 30 or
whatever.
So pretty much every study that has been done prior to this point was done in moderate and light
loads.
Now, the researchers who are writing up those studies don't think in S&C terms.
They think in like, you know, hypertrophy terms.
So they're, they think that anything that's like 8 to 10 Rep Max is heavy and of course it's not.
But from an SC point of view, in a Physiology point of view, we divide it into heavy being one to
five and moderate being 6 to 15.
So pretty much every study prior to this one that's just come out has compared moderate loads around
the 8 to 12 Rep Max zone and light loads usually around the sort of 20 to 30 Rep Max zone.
Physiologically, as long as you're using a load that's heavier than about 30% of 1 Rep Max, you are
kind of doing more or less the same thing because you are occluding blood flow.
And if you occlude blood flow, then you can have metabolite related fatigue, which allows you to
slow down muscle fiber shortening velocity without impairing muscle fiber force.
And that allows you to have high mechanical tension at muscular failure when you're reaching high
levels of motino recruitment.
If you go lighter than 30% of 1 Max, then even in a concentric phase, blood flow is not occluded and
so you end up with blood just leaving the muscle in the concentric phase.
And of course that takes all the metabolites with it.
So you can't build up metabolite accumulation and therefore you can't reach muscular failure with
the same, you know, kind of degree of mechanical tension because you're relying on calcium I related
T mechanisms to create your local, you know, kind of peripheral fatigues.
So basically anything up to kind of 35 ish, maybe even higher than that Rep maxes are going to give
you that full occlusion and they're going to allow you to kind of stimulate hypertrophy irrespective
of Rep range.
So the question just.
Because that is probably wouldn't be confusing for some people.
That's kind of what BFR is doing, yeah.
That's why you could create.
Yeah.
So you could literally, you know, kind of create the same effect with BFR and antenna baked beans.
You know, you could literally lift almost no load whatsoever and mimic the effect of a heavy load or
a moderate or a light load.
And we tend to talk about very light loads when you go off the upper end of that Rep range and you
start using something that's lighter than 3025 to 30% tomorrow at Max.
And that in normal situations without BFR, if you use 20%, for example, of of like there's a famous
study which used four different Rep ranges, I think it's 2040, sixty and eight.
And they found that basically the the anything above 30, so the 4060 and 80 produce the same
hypertrophy as long as using the same number of sets to failure ish, whereas the 20% doesn't.
And it's because you don't have metabolite fatigue in there in the 20% because you just got haven't
got that occlusion of blood flow.
If you applied and there's lots of BFR studies using 10 or 20% of all my Max.
If you apply BFR in that situation, you immediately occlude blood flow and you create the same
scenario as you would do with a heavier load than 30%.
So either a light moderate or a heavy load.
You're mimicking that with what we classify as a very light load, which is that that notch below in
terms of, you know, the force production.
So yeah, BFR gets you around that issues for people who have, I mean, I've talked about this before
in context of BFR, but people who have some kind of, you know, sort of specific restriction on how
much weight they can actually lift because of maybe some joint issue or tendon issue or something
like that.
You can use BFR in those scenarios and you will get a muscular response even though you are below
that kind of critical threshold for for occluding the flow of blood naturally with the muscular
contraction.
So yeah, it's really that red brains issue is just about whether or not we're creating metabolite
relativity.
So this study basically looked at 3 to 5 red maxes as one of the training groups.
So this is really interesting.
Now there's a number of things I want to talk about here, but just to start off when I'm pointing
out, I think this is the first study that said we're going to compare two groups, one which is
actually heavy 3:00 to 5:00, you know, reps per set and one which is like 2025 reps per set.
And they're going to use the same number of sets to failure in both groups and they're going to use
the same rest periods in both groups.
Now, I think we have got a study prior to that which used heavy loads and long rest periods
comparing with lighter loads and shorter rest periods.
And of course it was like, was it the rest period that was creating the issue or was it the Rep
brains that was creating the issue?
And they ended up with about the same hypertrophy in both groups more or less.
So what it was like, it fits with what we're going to talk about today, but it's not as kind of
controlled, if you like, in comparison with the one that we've got at the moment.
Having said that, I just want to make the point that if you want to physiologically control for the
effect of rest period, then you would have longer rest periods in the in the higher Rep group.
So there's not a perfect scenario by any means.
If you have say in this context human it rests between sets and you're using a three to five Rep Max
and a 2025 Rep Max.
You are not going to find that you've got CNS fatigue recovery in light load grou because you are
still going to be out of breath when you come to do the next set in the context of this kind of type
of rogram.
Now having said that, again now to qualify my qualification, we are talking about single leg
training here.
So it isn't as big a deal as it would be if you were doing like squats or something.
If you're doing squats, then you would basically expect that your light leg group or light load
condition would be just completely destroyed by trying to do 2 minute rest periods.
But you know, we're talking about leg pressing the extension in this context and it's single leg
versions of the two.
So I don't think it's quite as horrible.
I would be pretty miserable in that scenario trying to do, you know, 25 reps of a single leg leg
press.
I would be extremely unhappy, especially taking 2 minute rest period.
But that's by the by, I'm an old man.
Basically the study used these two training groups compared the hypertrophy single leg within
subject design, which is awesome.
Hypertrophy pretty useless for strength gains, but really, really interesting from a hypertrophy
point of view because you've got your every subject is their own control.
So you've got, you know, one Group, One sorry, one condition, one leg doing, you know, kind of three
sets of leg presses, three sets of knee extensions twice a week.
Now six sets, especially light loads is probably not going to be, you know, recoverable really.
But the on the heavy load side it probably is.
So you know, they're doing one leg three to five RIP maxes still very three to five rows per set to
failure, 6 exercise, six sets across 2 exercises.
So like pressing the extension probably is recoverable actually.
So there's a bit of a recovery difference again.
So again, we've got a little bit of a problem there in terms of, you know, comparing these two
situations because we're probably not seeing full recovery in the case of the light load group
compared to the heavy load group instructed as and again, instructed AS24 week blocks with a week
off in the middle.
The week off in the middle basically has a single workout with one set to each exercise.
Now this is one of those great examples where I'm just going to be a little bit rude because
ultimately if you have read the literature and you know, and it's not difficult to read the
maintenance literature, there's only like 4 or five studies.
If you know that literature, you would know that you need three sets once a week to create a stable
maintenance situation or you want to do single sets twice a week.
You wouldn't program a single set once a week for each exercise and expect a bit to be able to
maintain the state of muscle mass that you've sort of started that week off in.
So I don't understand why they structured the training program the way they did, but it doesn't
really matter.
It's there's a, there will have been a small amount of atrophy that week.
So I don't agree with the way that they designed that.
But you know, no training program is perfect.
We've basically got a, a kind of a four week plus AD training week or AD load week and then another
four week period.
So there would have been a little bit of a kind of a benefit for the light load group in the middle
where they would have recovered some of that accumulated fatigue with, you know, kind of six set
workouts for the single joint quadriceps.
But ultimately, you know, it was not horrible training program for our purposes because it would
have been nearly nearly recoverable.
And it's not a, you know, 4 weeks plus four weeks is not huge amount of time to be kind of worrying
about the accumulation of of post workout fatigue.
And essentially after all that we end up in a place where both training groups pretty much produce
the same muscle group muscle growth.
So if you've got a, you know kind of sort of situation where we're seeing, you know, three to five
reps per set producing the same hypertrophy as 20 to 25 reps per set, notwithstanding the issues
around rest periods or intra workout fatigue, notwithstanding the issues around post work uptake
accumulation.
What we're saying here is that broadly speaking, we're getting, you know, the same hypertrophic
stimulus from a set of 20 to 25 reps as a set of three to five reps.
Now this has two really big implications for 2 battles that you know, the fitness industry or the
science based fitness industry has been fighting for the last year or two.
Lee.
And the easier battle to resolve really, and I think it was resolved a long time ago, but this is
the one that still perpetuates in a number of places is that volume load is still believed in some
places in the industry to have something to do with hypertrophy.
And volume load is the number of sets times the number of reps times the actual weight on the bar.
So where you can see in this study and they did the analysis is that essentially the light load
group is doing anywhere between 2 1/2 and four times as much volume load as the heavy load group.
So it's just like it should produce way more hypertrophy if volume load has anything to do with
hypertrophic stimulus.
Now of course it doesn't because stimulating reps model is probably true.
So anybody who's running around going volume, volume load, they're the same thing.
Volume is the number of sets to failure.
Volume load is sets times, reps, time, weight, you know, and so people are going, Oh no, it's just
the total force time integral or it's the total, you know, kind of volume load that the work that
the muscle is doing that determines hypertrophy.
This study absolutely stamps on the hypothesis.
It actually stamps on it and does a little dumps on top.
I mean, it's just destroying this idea completely.
If you've got a scenario where one group is doing four times the volume load to the other group and
they're getting the same hypertrophy, that tells you that your volume load hypothesis is garbage.
I mean, it really does.
There's there's no possible way for people to, you know, state the volume load has anything to do
with hypertrophy with a straight face after this study came out, you know, it really is is done.
The argument is over.
But of course people are going to still argue that because, you know, not everybody, you know, does
the reading.
Secondly, we've then got this idea of, and this is the really interesting bit from my perspective,
you know, how are we having a scenario where we think there's probably about 5 stimulating reps in a
set and yet we're seeing the same hyper true three to five reps per set as we are with 2025 reps per
set.
And now within that conversation, there's of course the people who are running around going, well,
we think you can get hyper true with eight reps from failure now, 8 reps in reserve or 7 reps in
reserve.
We think you can get hyper true with that.
Well, clearly that isn't going to stack with this study very well at all, because if that were true,
then your light load set will be getting an extra kind of 3 or 4, you know, kind of stimulating per
set compared with your, your heavy load group.
You know, So straight away it's, it's starting to come back in the other direction and go, maybe
there aren't as many stimulating reps per set as certainly these people are arguing, you know,
because if you've got a situation where you can create hyperture with, you know, sort of 7-8 reps in
reserve, then that implies that you're, you know, moderate load sets should be producing a bigger
stimulus or even light loads that should be producing a bigger stimulus than a heavy load set.
So straightaway there's kind of that difference going on there.
It's pulling us in the opposite direction from all those guys have been saying, but also it kind of
goes well, you know, genuinely, are there even fewer than 5 stimulating reps per set?
Because if we can create the same hypertrophy with three to five reps per set as we can with 20 to
25, you know, is it that maybe there's only four stimulating reps per set and actually 5 is an
overestimate in that in that scenario.
So I think this is this is starting to get really interesting because certainly before this study
came out, a lot of the literature in the stimulating reps zone, the, the, the reps in reserve
literature was starting to pull us towards thinking maybe there are more than 5 stimulating reps per
say.
I've been on, you know, this podcast and other places saying maybe there's even 6.
But this is now pulling us back in the other direction and going, you know, actually maybe it's not.
And the interesting thing is that these people did have two years of strength training experience.
So, you know, one of the things that you know, many people have noticed is that our inferred from
the Physiology literature is that when you first start out strength training, basically anything,
any muscle fiber that you've got that's above the low threshold zone.
So low threshold is kind of the bottom 30 to 35% of the muscle varies between muscles.
As I said before, postural muscles probably go higher than that, but you know like carved muscles
probably up like 50% of like that.
But you know, generally speaking, you know, muscles are going to kind of be low threshold up to
about 3035% by volume.
Above that, you're in the high threshold zone, pretty much any of that zone, unless you've been
active in high force physical activities like you do manual labor or you work in the garden a lot or
you do something else that requires lifting and carrying.
You know, then generally speaking, those fibres of that zone above 3035% are literally just going to
be relatively untrained.
They're going to have very low levels of kind of development.
You start doing strength training and pretty much all of that entire zone starts growing as you
progress through your strength training career.
You start capping out those muscle fibres at the bottom end of the high pressure mountain.
It pull relatively quickly because they are, you know, kind of limited to smaller sizes because
they're more oxidative size principle striative muscle tells us that they're going to cap out and
stop growing.
So you end up with a situation where pretty much only the top end of the Moat unit poor is capable
of growth, which means that you've got to get to higher levels of recruitment before you start
seeing any kind of meaningful hypertrophy.
So I think most strength trained, most strength trained people are in a zone where they have to kind
of get to a pretty high level of effort before any fibre starts receiving a stimulus that makes it
grow.
Yes, you can create growth in fibers lower down.
Sorry.
Yes, you can create stimulus in fibers lower down, but they're not going to grow in response to
that's doing this because they're already fully grown.
Interestingly, somebody asked me a question recently about why, you know, kind of the magnitude of
the electromyography signal is not related to the hypertrophy results.
This is one of the reasons why, because you can have a whole bunch of fibers that are fully grown
already and they're going to display a high level of activation.
You've got high action potential, you know kind of propagation in that area and they're not going to
grow because they're already maxed out.
So you've got this inherent problem there, especially in strength training people where your
magnitude and electrical signal is not going to reflect the magnitude of the hypertroy because
you're stimulating stuff that isn't capable of growing.
It's a straightaway.
You've got that inherent problem with that relationship anyway.
So when we're looking at strength training people, they are going to have to get to much higher
levels of agreement, which means that in number of stimulating reps by definition is going to be
smaller.
I think that if you've got an untrained person, completely untrained, never done any kind of
physical activity, and I guess that's worth sort of dwelling on as well because I've often pointed
out that when I started strength training, you know, my generation was very physically active, you
know, before we even started strength training.
I mean, I could do like, I don't know, you know, I don't know, 6 to 8 pull ups before I even touched
a weight, you know?
So, you know, it was like how a generation was always being physically active, climbing trees,
running around, doing stuff, you know, kind of getting into trouble and the classic Gen.
X kind of childhood.
So the first time I picked up a barbell, I think I deadlifted double body weight.
You know, it was just like walked in the gym and did that.
So it was a very, very different kind of starting point from people who, you know, are starting from
sedentary behaviours.
So I think again, it's like I'm not necessarily saying starting from zero strength training, I'm
saying starting from zero development, whether that's been done from calisthenics, gymnastics,
whatever else sport you've been doing that requires those kind of, you know, physical kind of
activities that produce high levels of recruitment, high levels of force production, working with a
client once.
Who had spent about a year gaming, like he basically hadn't left his bed and had just spent the
whole year sedentary and he'd lost so much muscle mass.
Like even a walking was difficult for him.
And he decided, you know why I didn't stop this?
And he'd go into the gym and the amount of muscle that he was able to gain in a fairly short period
of time was tremendous.
That's the opposite end of the.
Spectrum.
I mean, it's like from the sublime to the ridiculous, you take someone who's been doing a lot of
gymnastics, a lot of calisthenics, you know, a lot of other kind of different physical activities,
maybe doing some grappling, you know, arm wrestling, that kind of stuff has never lifted the weight.
And they start going to the gym and they expect these wonderful results and nothing happens.
It's like, I mean, that was really kind of my experience.
I kind of started strength training and very little happened, you know, because I'd already kind of
got most of the way I was going to get anyway.
I mean from a coaching perspective.
Coaches don't do as much of like the transformation stuff anymore.
But when I started out, that was what everyone did, 12 week transformations and you passed it up on
social media.
I mean, we all knew as coaches, the best client you could have who would walk in the door would be
someone who had no background whatsoever of any kind of physical activity sport.
They'd just been sedentary, perfect.
Like what you can achieve in 12 weeks is going to be amazing.
Exactly.
I think that's.
The difference, I think somebody with only a sedentary background is going to probably have up to 10
stimulating reps per set.
I think that's probably the kind of territory that we could be expecting to see maybe even 12, I
don't know.
But that's that's kind of what will their experience was.
Somebody who's I've done two years of strength training or similar physical activities, they're
probably going to find that limited to that sort of classic number that I've been, you know, kind of
had stapled to my forehead, which is five.
You know, everyone's like, Oh yeah, he's the guy who says there's only 5 stimulating units per set.
And I'm like, well, that's not ballpark wrong, but that's not what I'm saying.
So, yeah, I think, I think this is just such a fascinating study to kind of start to to look and
say, well, does this pull us down in terms of estimates of stimulating RAP number per set in
strength training individuals?
So let me just add some of my thoughts on what's going through my head when I look at this study and
the results of this study and what I think is, is, is going on.
So firstly, what I've always said is that when we look at two different groups and now within
subject is great because we're removing the sort of inter individual difference effects that we can
get with between group kind of study designs.
But we still are going to have the problem of it being a statistical kind of calculation with
measurement error and all of that stuff.
So one of the issues with volume is that when you compare volumes, different volumes between groups,
you aren't going to detect small differences in volume.
So if you look at the literature, you often we're going to find the classic study design, one set
versus three sets versus 5 sets per workout.
One set versus 5 sets almost always produces a difference.
One set versus three sets and three sets versus 5 sets often doesn't.
So people are like, Oh yeah, volume always makes a difference.
I'm like, well go and look at the literature and you'll see for yourself that often small
differences in volume, even one or two sets per workout.
You know, don't make a difference and it's not because they don't make a difference, they do make a
difference.
It's just you can't see the difference because our measurement error is disguising the real
differences underpinning the physiological effects.
So again, when people look at the proximity to failure literature, they go, you know, 1 reserve is
exactly the same as failure.
No one repair reserve is statistically similar to failure.
But if you look at 3 reps in reserve versus failure is always a difference.
So people are like, Oh no, no, no, you can literally just miss the last RIP off and it doesn't
matter.
When I hear people say that, I'm like, this person doesn't understand the difference between
evidence and science.
It's like for them, evidence is like, you know, the results of the study are the law.
It's like that's what happens.
No, no, no, no.
That's the statistical, you know, result of the study.
To understand what happens, you have to go below that and go, what do I think is mechanistically,
physiologically occurring?
You know, and do I think that I can just continue extrapolating and this is just, you know, I'm not
noticing the effect because it's not big enough or do I think there's something actually going on?
If from a from a science point of view, if somebody goes, there is no difference between A1 Rep
reserve and failure in terms of hypertrophy.
My question to them is going to be tell me physiologically how that happens and they're going to be
what do you mean?
The studies show that is no difference mine.
The studies are telling you they can't find the difference between those two things.
Now it's either because it's too small or it's because there's something else going on that changes
the direction you've been going.
If you look.
But all the other reps in reserve studies, fewer reps in reserve you take, the closer to fail you
get, the more hypertrophy you stimulate.
OK, so what's magical then?
What are you saying is changing about going from one Rep reserve to 0?
Because you're telling me the trajectory changes.
So what physiologically is changing?
And again, they look at me as if I've grown an extra head and they're like, what are you saying?
Because they're thinking in evidence based terms, not science based term.
And I'm saying tell me what's changing because the trajectory up to that point has been telling me
that I'm expecting to see a continued amount of hypertrophy occurring with continued proximity to
failure close to failure.
So when I think about if they if they want to make that case, they've got to explain to me why am I
getting no mechanical tension stimulus on the muscle fibers that I official motion.
It's in that final repetition that makes no sense.
This is one of those situations where you have to go scientifically, I'm expecting there to be a
difference even though no evidence based data-driven kind of long term trials based.
I'm not actually seeing one.
I'm just inferring by drawing a line between the two things and going scientifically,
physiologically, I think that this the overall trend is going in that direction and I'm just filling
in the gaps.
So someone could say.
Well, I think it, you know, it's it's maybe not having a beneficial effect because it's taking away
from that next set boot by causing extra fatigue and whatever.
Like they could come up with a physiological explanation, but they don't do that.
That's the.
Point I'm making So what they're doing is that they're framing the question in an evidence based
point of view is to say if I can't find a statistical difference between these two things, then they
are you know, but ontologically they are the same.
And I'm like, no, no, no, that's not what your data is showing you.
Your data is showing you that the difference is too small to detect or it doesn't exist.
So if you want to tell me that it definitively doesn't exist, you're picking one of the two possible
possible answers there.
You've decided to pick one of those two.
You didn't realize you're doing that, but your evidence framework requires you to do that.
You've decided that they're actually the same.
OK, tell me why they are the same.
Tell me why it's not just a difference that's too small to detect.
You know, so my position is to look at the Physiology and go do I think it's one or the other?
Do I think it's that there is no difference or do I think there is just a difference that's too
small to detect?
So often when I'm looking at these volume studies or looking at this proximity to failure studies,
I'm going physiologically, I'm just going to draw a line and go, I actually think that this is just
a spectrum and that the differences you're measuring are just too small.
So I do think there's a difference between 1:00 set and two sets and one set and three sets.
And to be honest, I think most other people do as well.
It's just that when I look at this and I don't see a difference, I'm not picking the answer
automatically.
This says there isn't a difference.
I'm picking the answer that says there is a difference.
It's just too small.
And I think that because physiologically underpinning all of that, mechanistically, my model says
that there should be 1.
And I'm looking at this load, this load study now and going three to five reps versus 20 to 25 reps.
Do I think there should be a difference, you know, as a result of maybe missing one or two reps off
my heavy load set?
I think there probably should be.
I think that if you're doing a three, especially if there were a lot of three reps in there, I think
that you probably would be missing some stimulating reps as a result of doing that.
You know, because ultimately A5 Rep set is going to give you a stimulus on every single Rep of the
set.
If it's a 5 Rep Max, so does a three Rep Max, but three Rep Max has two fewer repetitions.
So and I'm expecting that to be a smaller hyper hypertrophy stimulus in that particular situation,
that comparison.
But again, coming back to what I said earlier, the light load group would definitively have been
suffering both intra workout fatigue mechanisms that were greater and post workout fatigue
mechanisms that were greater.
You know, really, if there is a hypertrophy researcher listening to those who hasn't pulled out all
their hair already listening to me, you know, they could control better for rest periods by letting
the resting heart rate or heart rate get closer to a specific threshold relative to resting heart
rate between sets.
So they could decide, you know, resting heart rate plus whatever 10 beats per minute or whatever 20
or whatever they want to do and they can go, we're going to let heart rate come back to this level
and then we're going to do the next set and it's going to be an individual rest period basis.
And then you would physiologically control for the CNS fatiguing effects of your rest period.
You wouldn't control necessarily so much for the, you know, peripheral stuff.
Certainly on the calcium marmalade side, you can't control for that.
You're going to get more of that with the light load than you are with the heavy load.
But that's intrinsic to the rest, to the Rep rains, not intrinsic to the rest period.
But you should control both metabolite and the CMFD because the two are linked.
So if you actually wanted to control for rest period in a better way than we're doing it at the
moment, you would use rest periods.
That's rest periods.
You would use resting heart rate basis and come down to a certain level relative to that.
Obviously, if you can't really come back all the way down to resting heart rate levels because you'd
be there all day, but you could come down to some threshold above that, percentage above that or
number of beats above that.
And if you did that, you'd probably be much more controlled for the behaviour of light loads in
terms of the cardiovascular system.
So again, I think you know this, you could potentially say, well, you know, is it that the
measurement differences to measurement is not accurate enough to detect the difference between the
heavy loads and the light loads?
Or is it because we're losing a little bit in terms of the heavy loads because we're losing a
stimulating Rep in the light loads where we're accumulating fatigue and we're also suffering intra
workout by having a higher degree of supraspinal CNST because we're not actually cardiovascularly
recovering from set to set.
And you can say, well, maybe those two things are equaling each other out, but this is a
physiological analysis of a study, you know, and we're always going to be kind of having those
things going in opposite directions when we're comparing different training programs.
I mean, again, this is one of the things that people don't realize when they start comparing Rep
brain, sorry, Rep ranges is what we're doing today when they start comparing ranges of motion.
So you've got a study that has multiple set protocols and one's got a high large range of motion,
one's got a smaller range of motion.
People don't realize that the larger range of motion is going to give you more calcium and relative
T.
It's like we, you know, so are you controlling for that in the context of what you're investigating?
Are you really investigating a single thing or are you investigating a cluster of things?
Because if I use a large range of motion in a quad exercise, I'm expecting to get some stretch
mediated.
I purchase from doing that.
But at the same time I'm getting more calcium I'm relative to T, which is going to impair the
effects of future or the stimulus of future sets in that workout, but potentially also impact on a
subsequent workout as well.
So you're not actually measuring a single variable, you're actually measuring the impact of multiple
things that are happening as a result of changing one.
Very.
Yeah.
How much?
Do you think so in this, in this study, obviously they were doing 6 sets per workout.
So even if they were say the heavy load group is averaging 4 repetitions per set, we're talking 24
ish maximi stimulating repetitions.
At a certain point, we would expect that there's not really going to be much additional stimulus
within a single workout.
How much do you think?
Well, that's the other issue, isn't?
It it's like if they were doing single sets, we'd have probably seen a much bigger the potential for
difference and the single set would then.
Obviously control for for the intra workout fatigue and also the post workout recovery.
Yeah, yeah.
I mean really to sort of detect meaningful differences between training variables, it makes much
more sense to limit volume.
You're going to see a much bigger difference between, you know, single set protocols.
If you're interested in range of motion or if you're interested in Rep range, it's much better to do
single sets.
We do a whole bunch of sets, but we have the volume load.
At least this enabled us to really see different.
I mean, to be honest though, I think you probably still would have seen meaningful differences in
volume load.
Now obviously, what do you say this was?
Like 4 times higher.
There's two and.
1/2 in the knee extension and four times in the leg press.
I mean, it's just, it really does.
I mean, if nothing else, it makes that whole idea nonsense.
I mean, anybody who's running around going volume load is related to hypertrophy, you know, they're
just, they're not paying attention.
You know, this, this, I mean, I've, I've, I've had, I've been showing data on this for for five or
six years, but never to this extreme extent.
I mean, I think the previous data that I've shown maybe has the light group producing 1 1/2 to two
times as much volume load.
And I think people kind of saw those numbers and just like, I'm just going to ignore that.
Four times as much volume load.
It's like no conversation's over.
Anybody running around now saying volume load has anything to do with hypertrophy.
It's just, as I say, not really paying attention.
It's not a valid hypothesis.
It's gone.
So, you know, it's got to, it's got to be rejected, really.
So, yeah, in that, at least as you say, is something that was definitively demonstrated by this
study.
Really the stimulating reps discussion is more difficult to get to because there's so many things
going in different directions.
I just think overall it pulls the feeling of the data back in the opposite direction from where it
was creeping beforehand.
As I say, you know, the last couple of years people have been pulling out studies that show reps in
reserve of larger and larger magnitudes producing hypertrophy and they're saying, oh, we know, come
on, we've got 567 reps in reserve, potentially producing a little bit of hypertrophy here and there.
You know, and now this study is coming back and pushing us in the opposite direction going, you
know, maybe that's, that's, you know, kind of not really valid.
Now if somebody wants to consider the alternative hypothesis that the stimulating reps hypothesis is
not valid, then they've got to come up with an explanation of, you know, how do you end up with, in
many studies, identical hypertrophy with different route ranges, so moderate and light loads and now
here heavy versus, you know, light loads.
How do you end up with, you know, the same same hypertrophy occurring with the same number of sets
of each Rep range and yet balance that with situations where potentially you think these studies
showing high degrees of reps and reserve like 567 reps and reserve.
How do you balance that with those still producing hypertrophy?
Have you got a model that will explain that to a better extent than stimulating reps?
And as I've said, the number of times, if you think you can solve that problem, that phenomenon,
that set of observations in a better way than my stimulating model does, please write it up and send
it to me.
Because, you know, I'd love to see a better explanation than one that I've got.
And there isn't one at the moment.
You know, be cool to actually have some degree of competition for the model anyway.
So really I'm just kind of bringing people's attention to this very cool study, which is, you know,
showing us that this gap in the literature that we've had for a long time now, you know, where
everyone's just been measuring moderate 8 to 12 versus light 2025.
Now suddenly we've got this, you know, definitive study constructed in exactly the same way.
Now, as I pointed out in this podcast, there are limitations with structuring studies in that way
with rest periods and post work apathy accumulation, all that kind of thing.
But fundamentally, at least it is comparable with the prior studies which have done the same thing
with moderate versus heavy where they've done three sets a couple of times a week, whatever, three
to five sets a couple of times a week.
And they've done, you know, the same rest periods between sets for both groups.
And that now transposes that model into a new territory where we've now got heavy versus light as
well.
And it gives the same answers.
People have been, you know, kind of quoting this idea.
Interestingly, people have been quoting for a long time the idea that any Rep range between 5 and 30
gives you the same hypertrophy as long as you do the same number of sets to failure per workout.
That five at the bottom end of that range was always a little bit deep, obvious, because if you
weren't trying to find studies that would show that you couldn't find them.
They kind of start around.
You can argue maybe around the six to eight zone, but more reasonably it's around the 812 zone.
So if you were being realistic, you would have said that 3.5 to 30 isn't really true.
It's more like 8 to 25.
But people have always said kind of 5 to 30 because it's round numbers.
But you know, 8 to 25 is probably a fairer description of the literature up to this point.
Now this calls that 8 all the way down to, you know, maybe 4.
So now we're kind of fairly in that original territory where people have said 5 to 30, when that's
probably 4 to 25 is probably a better zone.
I mean, there are the occasional study that drifts higher than 25.
I'm not saying that I don't think that would happen.
I think probably 35 would probably do it, but I'm just saying in terms of what data there exists to
support that kind of claim.
But yeah, really such an important study that is well worth having a read of.
So I guess I should read the title so that people know what it is.
The title is diversion strength gains but similar hypertrophy have to low load and high load
resistance exercise training and trained individuals.
So people want to look that up.
It was published in August 2025.
S from a application.
Standpoint, like you said, this kind of fills in some gaps.
It doesn't necessarily change a whole lot of kind of grounds what maybe, you know, we've been
talking about for a little while.
But you would say that say you've got a total beginner, obviously, as you've identified earlier,
they could actually achieve more stimulating repetitions in a set.
So a total beginner doesn't necessarily like may not get the same gross from doing these low
repetition sets, these heavy sets that we're talking about here.
A total beginner could be getting away, you know, could actually get ultimately better results with
say sets of, you know, 810 thereabouts.
And then as someone becomes more experienced over time, obviously those repetitions are going to
drop down.
The the in terms of how many stimulated repetitions per set are going to drop down.
And so in this study, obviously these people were two years trained.
We would say that someone who has, you know, a couple years of training experience, this is where
potentially those, you know, maybe 4-5 Rep sets could potentially make sense for them.
Yeah, yeah, totally.
And again.
It's going to depend on, you know, the exercise and the, you know, training history and, and that
kind of thing of the person.
I think that, you know, from my perspective, and again, and whether or not the person is using
anabolics, one of the one of the issues that has come up over, you know, time when I've been talking
to people, coaches who work with with with with athletes who use anabolics is that they can get so
ridiculously strong that heavy loads start to become an issue practically in terms of just going
around and stealing every single plate in the gym, which makes you very unpopular.
And also in terms of, you know, just the joints of the same size as anybody else's joints.
And they start to, you know, kind of creak if you're using insane amounts of weight.
So there are going to be scenarios and that is an issue if you have a history as well of some
specific strength sport like for example, I've often talked about how when I do lat exercises, it's
a different experience from me for doing pressing exercises.
So when I did a lot of one arm chin training, now when I do lat exercises, I have a different it's
for me.
If if I were to try and train in that heavier load zone, I'd have a not, not the same problem as
somebody using anabolics, but I'm drifting in that direction.
If I start to use heavy loads and not exercises, I'm starting to basically Max the machines out and
I start to creak.
In contrast, pressing exercises, no problems at all because I never got to the same degree of
strength that I got to in those playing exercises in my pressing exercises.
So I think even as a natural author, you can kind of push in that direction.
We start to find that heavier load zones become practically, you know, less attractive from from the
kind of the is this.
But yeah, from everything else that I do, I can I can drift into heavier zone territory and it isn't
going to cause me an issue.
I think that's a good point.
Let's let's.
Just hammer that home for a second because I do see that a lot where when stuff like this comes out,
then the narrative becomes for only ever do sets of four to six and you should never do anything,
anything outside of it.
Never do more, never do 8, never do 10.
It's a bad idea.
And obviously, you know, we've talked about in this episode that yes, it can be some additional
fatigue that comes along with those moderate or high repetition sets.
But as you've just said there, you know what, there's times where that could make a little bit more
sense.
And you know, in my own programming and with my clients, my groups, I do use actually quite a lot of
low repetition sets of stuff, you know, going sometimes even singles.
And you know, I'll do that a lot with classes, but I'll often use double S, triples, sub 5
repetitions.
And I find especially if we're keeping threats in reserve because we need to identify that if we're
saying, hey, potentially an advanced athlete might only have let's say 4 maximus stimulating
repetitions in a set, well, that's a set of failure.
And that's assuming they're taking a set of failure.
They're not saying we're keeping repetition or two repetitions in reserve.
Well, you know, we could actually be doing fewer repetitions in a set for that essentially same
purpose.
So we need to identify, you know, how obviously how many repetitions can that person be achieving in
in a set of failure?
And then like you said, that there's going to be times where simply it's just not going to be
feasible to do those heavy sets.
And you know, it might be that they injured.
It might be, like you said, machines might just simply not go heavy enough.
And OK, you might be able to load a million page or get a gym pin or whatever, but then you're stuck
in a situation where it might take me 10 to 15 minutes just to ultimately set up that exercise, do
your warm up set so you don't Drake apart when you do the set.
And it's like, well, is that actually going to be?
Is that going to lead to a better outcome?
If you're spending all that time actually carrying plates from all over the gym, the loading
machine, it might be better for you just to do that set of 10.
You don't need to be scared of doing that set of 10.
So while we're saying, hey, you might only be able to get 4:00-ish maximally stimulated repetitions,
that does not mean that that's all you should ever do.
Yeah, well, this.
Is an interesting observation from a psychological point of view, because one thing that I've
noticed in talking about how strength training works on social media over the last decade is that a
lot of the people on social media cannot differentiate between what's happening physiologically and
what's happening practically.
They can't draw a line between those two things, you know?
So what we're describing here is that physiologically, this is how something works practically.
You might need to modify that in One Direction or another in order to get the best outcome for you
in the gym context.
And people don't seem to be able to draw a line between those two things.
It's like physiologically this is what is happening, you know, And you can't argue with that.
It is what it is.
And so when I go, you know, yeah, 4 to 6 reps per set probably is the optimal scenario from the
muscles point of view.
If you can't do that because the gym machinery doesn't give you the ability to go that heavy or
because it hurts or because, you know, whatever reason there is, then obviously we move away from
the physiological kind of principles driving the decision making process and we go, we now have
additional practical concerns that mean that isn't ideal.
What I see all the time on social media is people being unable to like take that two step process.
I used to joke when I did the podcast with Paul that people couldn't hold more than one thought in
the mind at one time.
And that's why we have this scenario where, you know, you say to people, hypertrophy is driven by
the combination of hymotene equipment and hymechrinical tension per fiber.
And it's like people can't understand that.
It's like, no, no, no, give me an answer that only has one variable.
I'm like, because it actually fundamentally is A2 variable system.
You know, I think we're seeing the same kind of issue here where people go, you know, tell me what
the perfect thing to do in a workout is.
And I'm like, well, physiologically is this.
But, you know, practically you might have to modify it For these reasons.
And they're just like, you see the kind of the smoke rising from the brain as it explodes.
You've just given me a two-part answer and I can't process it.
No, seriously, come on.
It's like physiologically this would be perfect.
But if that isn't possible for these practical reasons, then you have to modify in these directions.
You're going to end up in a slight different place.
I mean, honestly, sometimes I just despair, you know, about the human race, You know, I'm like, come
on, guys.
It's not difficult to start with one set of parameters and then have to modify that because of some
other scenario that is changing that.
You know, it doesn't mean the Physiology is wrong.
It means the Physiology is.
And then practically you have to change it because there are other factors.
It's just like saying to somebody, well, this is the perfect exercise for the goal that you that you
have.
And they're like, oh, when I do that, that hurts and OK, fun, we'll find a different 1.
You know, we just modified the perfect scenario for your personal situation because you have this
limitation.
Or somebody might say to me, you know, I want to develop my hamstrings to the best extent, but I
don't have any leg kill machines in my gym.
I'm like, OK, well, we'll figure out something that gets you.
Yeah, you're not going to say.
Well, just just do the Lego.
Well, I don't have the Lego exactly.
It's like we're starting with what what, you know, the perfect answer would be and then we modify
accordingly depending on the other, you know, factors that modify your existing scenario, you know,
and I think instinctively people can do that, but for some reason when they go on social media, part
of their brain falls out and they can't do that in that particular situation.
They feel like they need 11 answer to drive everything.
It's like that's not how this works.
A couple of suspicions.
About that, and I think one of them is I think sometimes people always need permission to believe or
think a certain thing or do a certain thing.
And so I think when when the narrative repeatedly is no, you can only do this, you can only work in
there 4/6 or 48 differential, whatever that particular topic is.
I think at that point people think they're not allowed to think outside that box and they're not
allowed to problem solve in the way that, you know, intuitively makes sense.
So I think you sometimes actually just give me people permission.
Hey, you can actually take, you know, these physiological principles you're talking about and you
can think outside the box and think how it's going to work best for you and how can you apply it.
That's OK.
If it looks a little bit differently to how your favorite influencer does it, that's OK.
If that makes sense for you.
I honestly think sometimes people just need to be told you can you can do that.
I don't know why that's the state of things, but I think that's that's what we see a little bit
online.
And one other point I want to make there is sometimes what sometimes that adjustment I guess that
people make may not even be less optimal.
So you've given the example, hey, I don't have a late curl, how do I maximally develop my
hamstrings?
Well, OK, maybe the solution there is in fact going to be a little bit less optimal, but sometimes
what's less optimal physiologically may in fact still be again the optimal option to do because of
these these other factors that I guess we weren't necessarily accounting for initially.
So what I mean by that is again, that example where let's say you're using so much load and an
exercise that you in fact do need to walk around the entire gym and collect any single weight plate
in the gym.
Well, that's actually most likely not going to be the optimal option.
It's going to be very demotivating.
When everyone is staring at you with hate filled glares because you're exactly drop as a result and
you're going to find that your recruitment isn't as high, the same thing.
I mean, you're doing an exercise and it causes pain, then the pain is going to cause you obviously
to reach maximal tolerable potential effort a lot earlier.
Therefore you're not going to have as high levels of recruitment in the target muscle.
So, you know, there are going to be scenarios where you're absolutely right, there are specific, you
know, kind of other things happening which is going to impair your ability to maximize the perfect
scenario.
So you have to then find an alternative that is going to give you a better result.
No, I mean, but that doesn't change how the Physiology is working.
No, you know, and I think that's the bit that people's, you know, brains don't seem to be able to
process.
It's like, you know, you tell them how this is how the Physiology works and they kind of hear it as,
you know, the law of the universe.
Am I?
No, it's like and ultimately what we're saying.
There, there could be like another physiological factor, I guess that you haven't considered in that
scenario exactly exactly because.
We're not, we're not able to kind of go through and say, you know, here's how the Physiology works,
you know, except, you know, and here are 10 exceptions to that.
If I'm not going to start listing all those out every time I give, you know, kind of broad brush
kind of descriptions of how something works.
But incidentally, you could figure those out if you actually know the underlying Physiology.
So if like the example we just gave about pain or lacking or low motivation because you've got a
whole bunch of people staring at you waiting for you to finish using all your, all the plates in the
gym.
Those things, you could actually have deduced that if you understood how Mark Ora's psycho
biological model fatigue works in the context of strength training.
If you understand that, you would understand how those two things can make a difference.
So this really just comes back to having a proper understanding of the physiological principles
underpinning these issues rather than just going, they said this exercise is best, so therefore I'm
going to do that exercise.
Or they said this Rep range is best though, therefore I'm going to do that exercise those Rep
ranges.
But why did we say that?
I mean, incidentally, I mean, obviously there's a lot of fuss about, there's always fuss about
things in, in the science based lifting community.
I mean, people are always whining about something.
But you know, you know, there's fuss at the moment about various bits and pieces.
And some of the people making a fuss and arguing about things are not actually giving a
physiological explanation of their point of view.
They're just going, you know, I'm saying this is true.
And then they stop talking or they make a, you know, sort of emotional appeal.
But that isn't moving anything forward.
Tell me, you know, why you think that and what it is you think is happening.
So if you think, you know, for example, if you think an exercise reaches 100% Motine recruitment,
then you know, tell me why you think that's possible and tell me what you think the mechanism
muscular failure is going to be if that's happening.
Because if you're hitting maximum recruitment, then what is it actually admitting us in reaching
muscular failure because it's not the maximum tolerable potential effort anymore, is it?
So, you know, again, it's lots of the situations people aren't taking the extra step and going well,
OK, well, what needs to be true for that statement to be true?
That's an interesting point.
That's an interesting question to ask oneself when one makes a statement like that, hey.
Because sometimes what you'll, what you'll find is the implications actually major.
And that if one what seems like a small statement is in fact true, we're actually essentially, you
know, an entire model falls apart.
Yeah.
I mean literally.
As soon as you start running around saying there's no, no such thing as a voluntary activation
deficit, then your entire model of muscular failure has to change.
You know, you can't use the psychobiological model of fatigue anymore because you've already hit
maximum recruitment and therefore you can't limit recruitment by having an extra tolerable potential
effort going on in there.
So, you know, what is it that's causing muscular failure?
Are you saying that it's a local fatigue mechanism?
In which case we've got some very interesting implications going on there because you can have, you
know, some serious problems down the line in terms of what the muscle fibers are experiencing.
So, you know, again, asking the question of what has to be true for that statement to be true, I
think is a really useful exercise.
OK, that was it's.
Great that there's something new that filled in a few gaps.
That is true.
It's been a.
Very long time since I saw them something genuinely now.
I mean, I come up with new stuff from time to time simply because I go away and I spend, you know,
two or three weeks working through an area that is tangential to what I already know.
People know that I've been talking a little bit more about preserving muscle mass and the deficit
recently.
It's not something I've ever looked at, but it's now something that I'm working on a lot more.
And so I bring that Physiology that's already been, you know, kind of in place for usually decades
into the Icona science based lifting immunity.
This is actually genuinely, genuinely new.
It's totally different.
You know, this rarely happens.
I mean, even like you could argue that there's been some new stuff on the stretch media's tuber tree
front hasn't really, because all that's happening is that the studies are coming out confirming what
the sarcomereogenesis research has already told us years ago and decades ago.
You know, So like when people go, oh, we now know that, you know, stretch mediate hypertrophy
doesn't happen in strength train lifters because the only two studies that have ever measured in
strength train lifters show there's no benefit of training to a more stretch position.
I'm like, well, yeah, but the sarcomereogenesis literature told you that decades and decades ago,
and fastical length literature has told you that pretty much every day since that point onwards.
It's like it's not telling us anything new.
It's just confirming something that we already knew, whereas this actually, this is genuinely new
territory.
And as I say, it does tilt my kind of sort of expectations of what that exact stimulating Rep number
might look like in trained people, which to be fair, I feel like.
I've heard you say that for quite a while that you thought for experienced lifters there was
potentially fewer than.
I actually wrote that in my very.
First article that I wrote about stimulating reps so like about 7 or 8 years ago.
Nobody read it.
So, you know, is there from the beginning because, you know, the size principle straight to muscle
tells you that it must be there.
So, you know, The thing is, again, just kind of everything that I said, there's pretty much nothing
that I say that isn't just a basic physiological principle applied to strength training.
I mean, I've said this a number of times and people just don't believe me.
You know, all I'm doing is saying, look, here is a physiological observation.
Like, I don't know, bilateral force deficit.
Bilateral force deficit shows you that, you know, you've got a higher level of recruitment when you
use a single limb versus when you use two limbs.
I mean, incidentally, the bilateral force deficit will be impossible to have if you had, you know,
kind of the ability to maximally activate every single muscle in a in exercise.
If you're saying got 100% activation and then Motine occurring in every muscle, you know, that is
trained by any exercise, then you would never have the bilateral force deficit because it would be
impossible to have, you know, because I wouldn't be able to go from A2 on bicycle to a single on
bicycle and increase recruitment.
It just wouldn't exist.
So where does that 20% increase in strength and motine equipment come from?
Is it magical?
So again, it's like, you know, people are saying things without reference to the observations that
exist in the literature.
So ultimately I've lost where I was going with that.
I was saying that you've been.
Sort of.
So while saying that advanced list has probably had fewer than 5 repetitions, actually similar
repetitions anyway.
And you'd said you wrote about that seven years ago.
No, Yeah, no.
It was, it was, it was right to the very beginning.
No, I was thinking about, I was, I was going in a different direction.
I was thinking about something else.
But yeah.
So essentially we've got for the first time in this particular study, something that is actually
taking us in a an interesting direction that gives us some new information.
You know, most of the stuff that we've been looking at prior to that point, I think, or I've been
looking at prior to that point, it's just, you know, developing, padding out, you know, areas or
moving into areas that I haven't previously talked about quite so much.
So it's a genuinely interesting, cool development and it's really exciting to see.
You know, and I should say, I have criticisms of the exact study design, but they're not criticisms
that make it a flawed study.
They're just criticisms that could have made it slightly better if they'd just done, you know, 2
workouts instead of one in the, in the D load period and single sets that have been fantastic.
And really everything else is just kind of a compromise.
It's like would we have been better, like you say, doing single set protocols to see the differences
genuinely between Rep ranges without rest period being a problem, without post work appetite
accumulation being a problem?
You know, that is definitely a possibility.
But would we have needed like a 12 week study to see that then from a statistically significant
point of view, would we have benefited from seeing the big differences in volume load in that
scenario?
So again, it's like what compromises do you want to make?
What specific things are you trying to extract from from that study design?
Well, thank you guys.
For joining us, hopefully you found that interesting.
Do you want to just read out the name of that study once more for anyone who wants to go and have a
bit of a look?
Yeah, sure.
So it's.
Divergent strength gains, but similar hypertrophy after low load and high load resistance exercise
training in trained individuals.
And so it's published 19th of August 25 S very, very cool to have a look at that if you get the
moment.
Cool.
Thanks for joining us.
Hopefully you'll join us again next week for another episode.