Episode: 022 How intra-workout carbohydrates reduce supraspinal CNS fatigue
URL: https://open.spotify.com/episode/48EYgg285TwEbn97Mgcr6y
Published: 2025-10-19
================================================================================

Welcome back everyone to another episode of Hypertrophy, Past and Present I.
I paused for a moment there as I started introducing because Riverside has apparently updated and
looks a little bit different, so I was taking a bit off guard.
But there we go, working on the fly.
Chris, how are you doing this week?
You've had a big week.
Yeah, I'm doing well.
Thanks, Jake.
Just yesterday I recorded the first episode of a new podcast project that I'm doing with Rob
Moussari.
It's called High Performance Physiology.
We're going to do the sports and athletic performance side of things.
Obviously we're doing the bodybuilding stuff here, but we're going to we're going to cover a bit
more on aesthetic performance and preparation for sport side of things.
Definitely also going to be a little bit shorter.
We're going to aim for bite sized kind of stuff.
There's a huge amount of stuff we can go at.
So we're doing a little kind of half hour episodes every week hopefully, but that's going to
hopefully come out maybe in a week or so once I've battled with, you know, as you said, Riverside
and all the other wonderful technological aids that we have to help us do these things.
But my age, it's definitely a battle rather than the enjoyment.
So yeah, that's that's the big week.
So I'm very excited to get that live.
Hopefully, hopefully it'll be available in, as I say, a week or so.
Very cool.
And did you say what the name was?
Yeah.
So we're calling the podcast High Performance Physiology and that's the that's the working title
that we've got.
Hopefully that'll be what ends up being called as well, given that I've been introducing it as that,
but we'll see what happens.
Yeah, very excited to get that live and see how people think about it.
So obviously I'll share it on social media as soon as it's available and I'm looking forward to
getting feedback from people who.
Benefit.
I like the title it it ties in well with this HPP high performance Physiology hypertrophy.
Post and present works.
Perfectly, I'll assume you did that on purpose, but it sounds like it could have been a bit of a
flake.
But yes, anyone who's wondering, obviously we're still continuing on with this podcast as well.
It's going to be complementary.
You're going to be covering different, different.
Topics totally.
Yeah, totally complementary.
So today we are talking about oh should we tell you?
We'll tell you in a bit, I'll tell you my plan 1st and then we'll go from there.
But I am going to give something away today on Instagram.
All the time I get asked what am I drinking intra workout?
Because I'm always posting a photo of some juice combination thing, some concoctment that's got
something in it and people know it's good juice and maybe it's got honey and they don't really know
what's going on.
And I get all these questions about why are you doing that?
What are you doing?
What's in it?
What's the goal, what's the purpose?
What is it?
And I haven't really told anyone.
All I said is this is this was a very common practice in the silver era.
And two people specifically that I know of that talk about some variant of this Ridge Park.
And Steve Reeves.
Now, you're a little bit sick to death with some Ridge park plans at the moment, so I'm not going to
give you another Ridge for at least a few weeks.
But I thought, you know what?
I do want to talk about this and to tie it in, I'm going to use a Sea freeze plan because Steve does
explicitly instruct to use a combination of orange juice and honey.
He doesn't say how much he he says he does say a few spoonfuls of honey.
OK, and Reg also says something similar, a few spoonfuls of honey, OK, and mix it in with with
orange juice and to sip on this during your workout.
Now Reg goes as far as to say to to kind of build it up and claim this is one of the most important
things when you're doing your he I think he talks about it in his bulking plan and he says, and this
actually find interesting, just like a little bit of a historical kind of like throwback to what the
world it might have been like.
And he talks about how if you can only afford the juice, just do the juice.
If you can afford the honey, you will get far superior results combining the honey with the juice.
And I think he even says something like, you know, when he can't afford both, he just has the juice
or something like that.
But it was interesting like, oh, honey was a privilege back then.
How how interesting.
I thought it was an interesting thing anyway, so OJ and Honey and Steve Reeves and that's my my sort
of Segway.
So this plan from Steve, this is an older plan.
So we have covered one before.
And the one that we covered before was one that he actually wrote down in a magazine in a Your
Physique magazine in 1952.
And he says that this was his favorite routine.
It was the OR fourth episode that we covered this on, and it is one of my favorite silly routines as
well.
And he does claim in that routine that that was one that he'd used when he won his biggest
accomplishment.
Steve, obviously Mr. Universe winner, he was 1950 Miss Universe winner.
Like the second Miss Universe.
We had the first one in 1948.
John Grimmick won that.
And then there was like a year off and then it kind of got rebranded and came back in 1950 and Steve
won.
So Steve, obviously super influential in the silver area, also became an actor in Hercules movies.
I don't know what other movies I've actually seen any of his movies, I'm embarrassed to admit.
But anyways, yeah, he he claims he used that workout in at that period in time.
And the workout we're going to talk about today was actually predated that.
So he used this one in 1949, I believe he says.
Now, one thing I do need to mention about this particular workout is this, sorry, in 1047, OK, so he
won, he won Miss America around 1948, I believe either 47 or 48.
So this would have been around the time that he he won Miss Dermott, maybe 47.
He wanted me to see USAI think the year after that.
So around that time.
And this was a pre competition routine.
So something that's very important to note with these these pre competition routines, and I think we
may have covered one of these before, maybe from clans Ross, but maybe I'm wrong there.
I can't quite remember.
These pre competition routines tended to be higher volumes.
So they did use them to an extent as part of their conditioning up to stage.
So what you tend to see is these routines have more sets.
Sometimes they'll even do 2A days and things like that.
And then post competition usually that would have a bit of time off to recover and then they'll go
back to more manageable volumes.
So there is slightly higher volume here than some of the other plans you've talked about and it is
certainly higher than the plan that he outlined a few years later.
And that might be some context as to why now.
He also does not specify repetitions in this plane.
He just tells us exercises and sets, you know, the silvery guys that weren't sort of that massive on
repetitions necessarily.
They sort of often gave like a 5 to 10 or something like that.
And a lot of the stuff that Steve talked about elsewhere was kind of that five to 10 double
progression method.
So I'm assuming it was probably done in a similar format here with about, you know, 5 to 10 double
progression.
So we begin with a wide grip bench, which we've seen before.
We've talked about a few plans that have this wide grip bench.
We touched on it a little bit last week as well in our podcast about why you would do a wide grip
over sort of a maybe narrow or standard grip.
So he did three sets of a wide grip bench.
Now, there's a lot of pressing in this one, Chris.
He then went into an incline press, which he tended to do with a fairly steep incline.
I believe he was doing standing incline.
We've talked about that standing incline contraption before, and it looks like it's about a 45.
And then he did three sets of that as well.
And then he went into two sets of a dumbbell shoulder press.
Now, in the images I've seen on stage doing the shoulder press, he does tend to do the more frontal
plane.
This is with dumbbells and then he goes into those two sets, in case I forgot to say that, and then
he goes into two sets of a dumbbell front raise.
We've got another pressing exercise.
He then goes into two sets of a curl and press.
Now I'm kind of glad to see this exercise fell out of favor because it seems a bit silly perhaps,
but it was a biceps curl into a shoulder dress.
I believe the shoulder dress was done with that supinated grip of the biceps curl, done with
dumbbells.
And then we go into a ULL U behind the neck.
So you'll be once again hay to see that we've got three sets of that into a seated close grip cable
row.
Three sets of that.
So we have three sets of the frontal lane ull U and then three sets of the satural lane row and then
two sets of a French press, 2 sets of a flat triceps dumbbell extension, like a lying extension.
And how is this?
We've got six sets of an incline bench curl, which is an interesting exercise selection and we might
touch on that.
And then we've got four sets of squats, 4 sets of leg curls and four sets of like a toe press on on
a leg press.
And then finally we've got 2 sets of a Roman chair.
Good morning, which is basically a back extension.
What do you make of all of that?
That was that.
I believe there was like a 45 back extension.
Someone can double check that on me, but in my mind that's the image I'm saying.
Cool.
There's so much good about this program.
I mean, you know, from an exercise selection point of view, you know, like that that sort of
selection of pressing exercises at the beginning, you know, the wide grip bench fantastic.
We've got, you know, all three regions of the packs getting worked there.
The incline press tends to be a little bit more sort of size to plane, doesn't it?
They tend to kind of move.
Generally with they are using they usually usually doing a little bit more satural plane.
I have seen photos of Steve using a bit of a wider grip so I don't know if he mixed it up a little
bit, but generally you would expect with a lot of the way these lifters were doing it, it was more
satural plane.
Yeah.
So then you've kind of got a bit more, you know, cavicular pack and depending on the angle you might
start to see anterior adult getting used a bit more in that one as well.
Steve had a very strong incline press and so some of those photos are where he's like pushing the
load a bit, you know?
Yeah, yeah.
So definitely a bit more anterior dot in there and then with the dumbbell shorter press in the front
plane, obviously much more meddled out.
So, you know, we can see this kind of tendency in those pressing exercises to focus on different the
muscle group, which is very, very cool.
Front rays, you know, I'm, I'm not a fan.
I think it doesn't really make a lot of sense to me as an exercise.
I think it's very unstable.
But again, you know, curricular pack focus a bit of anterior doubt as well.
Curling press probably falls into the same category.
I would say if you're doing them in a social plane, you're going to get pretty much the same effect
as a front raise, maybe with a bit more and tear it up a bit less curricular pack.
She's not really, you know, kind of you're kind of getting the weight to that top point without so
much, you know, kind of the focus on the lower part of the motion from that Dell perspective.
But you know, it's not a great exercise as you were saying.
But broadly speaking, you know, those pressing exercises seem to be selected in order to move the
focus from one prime mover as we would see them.
You know, like we say, the prime movers in pressing exercises, the packs, the delts and the kind of
triceps, it looks like they're kind of trying to move the prime moves around a little bit to focus
on different things, which is great pulling exercises.
I wonder whether this is the very first program that actually has a complete set of back exercises,
because there's an.
Early one as well, 1940.
7 row, which is perfect and we have a wide grip pull down, which is again perfect.
So you've got the narrow grip row for the kind of upper upper lats and you've got the kind of wide
grip pull down for the lower lats.
So fantastic.
You know, I mean, OK, fine, you know, maybe there's not and of course the row is doing your sort of
posterior delts as well.
So you know, with the exception of maybe saying well, there's not much trap in there, OK, fine,
there's not much traps in here.
But you know, other than that it's a pretty cool backward triceps.
Again, you know, I mean, when you say French press, I mean to me that's sounds like I can make a
coffee.
But I mean, like when you say French press, it's like, are we talking about?
Yeah.
OK.
So we're talking about something that is a sort of overhead triceps extension basically and then
kind of following that up with sort of a lying triceps extension.
Yes, I believe that that was done lying.
Yeah, So very similar exercise one's seen in.
One line really, I would say that's probably a bit of a let down because you know, if he'd kind of
gone maybe to a standing triceps push down, then you know, that would start to actually create a bit
of a different effect for me.
I think, you know, only 90° shoulder angle difference between the two is probably not enough.
I would want 108 or not 180, but close enough time 30° to make it really kind of target different
parts of the of the triceps.
But again, moving in the right direction.
I mean, it's not bad.
It's not like when I read bodybuilding, sort of one of the old bodybuilding magazine from the 80s
and they've got 7 different biceps girls and they're all back biomechanically identical, which is
using different equipment.
And I'm like, that's not really what we're trying to do here.
You know, what we're trying to do is get biomechanically different exercises to work different, you
know, regions or even different muscles of a group.
In terms of the biceps curl stuff, I mean, inclement is really interesting, you know, I mean,
obviously it's not done with a cable.
So you're not getting, you know, genuine kind of kind of peak efforts the bottom position like, you
know, ideally we would do if we wanted to kind of maximize biceps perky.
But you know, it is, it is interesting in and of itself as a, as an excise selection.
You combine that with the curl and press, which I assume was kind of more vertical standard biceps
curl position.
You know, maybe again, there's a little bit of kind of sort of difference there that's big enough to
create.
Again, it wouldn't be my preference to pair those two exercises.
With this incline curl he also performed them.
I think he invented the this idea.
This way of doing this is my understanding at least where the incline bench had, he would get a, a
bar, a metal bar and attach it to the back of this incline bench.
So he had a like AI guess like a, a support for his upper arms.
So he still had his arms behind him, but he was, I guess, more stable when he was doing it, I guess.
Yeah, no, I mean, that's always the issue with the incline munch curl is that you kind of end up
sort of doing shoulder movement or you're doing the the curl and I'm not sure that's, I think that's
probably why we see some weird data coming out with sometimes you get no sign.
I think there's a couple of studies showing proximal biceps region growth and it's like, well, hang
on a minute, how is that happening?
You know that that that's only going to happen from shoulder flexion really.
So I think there's some weirdnesses in in literature around that.
But yeah, I mean, the point I'm making here is simply that, you know, there's two biomechanically
sort of different curl exercises.
Again, like the triceps, I don't think they're biomechanically different enough to really be
optimal, but you can see that they're moving in the right direction in terms of leg stuff, not
really seeing an enormous mass.
I mean, the hamstrings actually, now I should correct myself.
The hamstrings is interesting because I literally have this question on Instagram and people were
saying, you know what, what hamstrings exercises are sufficient, You know, for a training program.
Well, really I would want three if I was kind of looking for a, you know, perfect program for a
competitive bodybuilder.
I'd be looking for seated like a line, like A and 45 to be back extension because I think that kind
of gives you everything, literally everything.
But if you're looking at general population, and I think finally I said in my story, I just wrote
Gen. pop because that's just kind of how we talk.
You know, when you're talking about, so general population is talking to other researchers, are you
talking to people who are reading literature?
You just say Gen. pop because everybody knows what you mean.
But apparently my audience don't know what I mean.
So I literally I wrote Gen. pop in this comment and like I had like a ton of these messages of
people saying who or what is a Gen. pop.
OK, fine.
So the vernacular doesn't translate very well.
But anyway, so but yeah, for general population, I think you probably could get away with two of
those three, you know, and and there would be most of what you would, what you would want.
But here we've got obviously leg curls and probably a fortified to be back extension, which again is
a fantastic combination for getting most of the way there in terms of amateur.
And then in terms of quads, obviously if you've got squats, but that, no, we talked before about the
knee extension problem.
You know, it's, it's unless you've got the equipment or you're prepared to cobble together some kind
of iron boot or, you know, some other strange, you know, kind of equipment, you've probably limited
to a direct firm training.
We have seen people in the silver era doing leg raisers to train the proximal part of the right
firm, which is totally fine, totally cool, but you're not going to get the distal part of the right
firm, which is the kind of bit that makes the quad look the way it does.
Or to a certain extent, you know, we're not going to get that without some sort of knee extension.
You know, does that kind of, you know, sort of sissies caught do that?
I don't know.
I'd love somebody to do some work on that one day.
But you know, maybe it does, maybe it doesn't.
Suppose it depends really on what paper is doing in that situation.
In terms of again, something that came up in the questions for me yesterday and Instagram, people
are still very confused about what antagonist inhibition is.
So, you know, there's this idea that still goes back to kind of, I mean, I remember when I first got
into this space, people were saying, oh, yeah, the hamstrings don't work in a squat because they
don't change length.
And people just repeated that.
And it was like, you repeated that enough times and people just believed it.
And it's like, that's absolutely not what's going on at all.
Changing length is irrelevant.
We've got some really nice isometric studies showing that if you're contracting the hip extensors
isometrically, then the rect Femina hamstrings switch off.
And if you've also got knee extension isometric contractions going on.
So you do any extension contraction on its own with you know, isometric 90° contraction and you've
got lots of rectum activation, lots of the other quadriceps activation.
As soon as you add on any kind of hip extension isometric on top of that, the rectosphorus drops out
completely.
Now you can do the same thing, you know, you know, in other in other exercise as well.
The fundamental is that the antagonist and inhibition effect works when you have a hip extension
force at the same time as a knee extension force, at least as far as you know, talking about the
hamstrings or the the rectum is concerned.
And, and this works pretty much for most 2 joint muscles.
Now it's got nothing to do with movement.
So if you're doing a CC squat and you've actually got some kind of hip extension force going on,
then what you're going to find is that the rectus from Oris drops out.
It doesn't have to be moving.
So really what it comes down to is what the balance looks like and whether or not you're creating
epic extension torque to keep that position.
If you're not, then fine.
But if you are, then I'm kind of a bit skeptical about whether it would work the way that people
think it works.
And I'm not saying it doesn't.
I'm just saying it's not about movement.
But I don't know, it's like always skeptical about that kind of expression.
We don't know.
It's like, well, who's this we and who?
Who's speaking for WE?
But I it's like when Summit says there's no studies that show you this.
It's like, well, as far as you know, you know there's no.
Studies, Sure.
That happens to me.
I mean, like, as you know, I've been diving into a whole new area of research that I've not spent a
lot of time looking about, looking at before and trying to figure out how some of these
physiological things work in that area.
And, you know, I've been surprised by just how much work had been done in a particular area by
actually the same laboratory.
And I just kind of, I knew of say, two or three of their studies and I was like, oh, yeah, I'm aware
of that.
They've done some work in that area.
And it's peripherally interesting to me, but I haven't gone into that because it's just not my core
area.
Anyway, I went in this last week and they don't like 15 studies.
I mean, there's just tons and tons of work on that stuff that I just didn't know about.
And it's like, you know, I'm probably, you know, as far as candidates go for people who've read the
most sports in the world and probably pretty high up on that list there.
And I didn't know about those studies.
So it happens to all of us, you know, absolutely happens.
So I don't think we can say that, you know, I wouldn't want to be one of those people who there is
no study showing this.
Well, I don't think there's a study showing this.
We tend to use the word we a little bit too, kind of broadly.
No, I think that's a really good point.
Even like for me, I'm normally careful when I say there's no studies.
I would normally only say that when it's a topic that I've like exhausted and I'm so confident in
that thing.
And I actually had a moment last week totally separate to this, but something obviously a lot of my
work is more functional health.
And one area of functional health that I know quite well is endometriosis.
So female condition, health condition, and I feel like I'm pretty aware of basically all the studies
to do with like, say supplementation and endometriosis.
Like I've spent endless amounts of time looking at this.
I found this study last week from like 2021 or something.
Like it's not even a new study and what they've done is it the supplement had been called a
different name.
So sometimes the supplement used a different name.
And for some like I still, I don't know how I hadn't found it under endo.
And I feel like it just got buried by pub Med and didn't like the SEO must've been so bad because I
don't know that anyone's seen this because I've never seen anyone talk about this.
So that's interesting.
But my whole point here is even when you think you know something inside and out, you might actually
still be missing something.
So we should be a little bit ideally be a bit more careful I guess with how we.
Possess.
Yeah, absolutely.
So we yeah.
So we were talking about I think antagonist inhibition idea and whether it or not applies in cities
cross and I was just saying I don't know if it doesn't, you know, I mean, I think there probably is
a way of doing them that does avoid it.
Does everybody avoid it in every time they do them?
Probably not.
So it's just kind of, but again, I don't know of any data that's really looked at that very well.
I'm very sceptical of EMG studies in the quads because you tend to get a lot to cross talk between
the rectus Morris and the other and the other quadriceps muscles unless you're using fine wire or
being extremely careful.
Number of studies I've seen where people have said, Oh no, no, no, no, no, we've got all this rectus
Morris activation in the squat, you know, and I'm like, OK, well why does the rectum never grow then
ever after squats?
I think there's maybe one study similar to the rectum grows after squats.
All the others don't show that.
No, I think, I think it's basically crosstalk we're seeing in those in those EMG studies.
Yeah.
So overall, that was my perspective on the program.
I really, really like it.
I think there's loads there that's really good shows very, very good understanding of biomechanical
differences producing different regional hypertroy effects.
Couple of differences that I would, I mean, obviously that I would just take out the front raise or
take out the curl and press and I would tweak and I'd probably put in A and I would probably cut the
incline bench curls volume in half and kind of use a totally different bicycle excise to supplement
that.
And you know, I'd probably tweak the triceps exercises a bit.
But the rest of it I love it.
I think it's really, really very, you know, I mean, and that really just, I get bored of saying
this, but these guys are writing better programs than 99% of what we see on the Internet today.
Yeah, exactly.
From an exercise selection standpoint, like you said, there's a few tweaks you would make, but by
and large.
Very, very good.
Very.
It's very solid.
Very, very good.
Now today we're going to talk about going to jump back to the thing I introduced at the start about
how Reg and Steve talk about using juice and using honey and adding this into your intra workout.
And even, I mean they talk about it at other times of the day as well, but they specifically say
intra workout, this is going to be particularly beneficial.
And there's actually research on this, isn't there?
Yeah.
So I think kind of going back there a little bit in time in endurance sports and also in soccer to a
certain extent, there was a tendency or a research area that involved what's called carbohydrate
mouth rinsing.
So basically it would be like a sports drink and they tend to use 6% maltodextrin.
And you know, it's a very, very common kind of sports drink that you, you'd be able to get a hold of
in most, most shops.
And rather than actually drinking it, they would just with it around the mouth to put it out.
And it's usually about 1020 seconds just before or a little bit before the activity.
And it shows surprising effects or it showed surprisingly positive effects in those kind of sporting
activities of more endurance type exercise.
And then in the last kind of sort of five or ten years, we've seen that body of research move over
into strength training.
So in fact, so much so that now we actually have I was kind of surprised to see just how much
literature there was now, but there's actually a metro analysis of about 11 or 12, maybe even 13
individual studies, strength training and the balance of the kind of the data in that matter
analysis showed that, you know, it has a positive effect in strength training as well as in the
endurance exercise.
So you know, basically this is really, really important because it shows that supraspinal central
nervous to fatigue is happening as a matter of course in strength training workouts.
That's hopefully no surprise to people who have been following my work for the last couple of years.
But the general kind of sort of belief in a lot of the science section of the fitness industry is
that superspinal CMST is not really a thing.
And the general perception is that you can kind of just push harder and try harder and it'll go
away.
And I'll come on to that concept later on.
But ultimately, you know, what this this is showing is that because the carbohydrate can't have a
peripheral effect because you're not consuming it, you know, it has to be working 3 sort of central
nervous system effect.
Your brain detects it and then obviously doesn't recognize the fact that you spit it out instead of
actually consumed it, but it recognizes it and it then changes something that allows you to then
perform more repetitions, you know, usually 1 1/2 or so more repetitions per sort of batch of sets
that you're doing, which is, you know, an extra 1 1/2 stimulating reps.
The point I'm making is that what I really like about this area of data, this area of research is
that it demonstrates unequivocally that we are getting superspinal CNFT happening at a workout.
And that part of that CNFT is a part of that superspinal CNFT is related to the body detecting
reductions in the storage of carbohydrate or, you know, pub glucose or whatever.
And it's obviously then the carbohydrate mouth is, is changing that.
And of course, we can now get that back to what you're saying about area whereby, okay, fine, the
honey and the orange juice was being consumed and not spat out, but it's still going to have the
same effect in terms of sort of alleviating that superspinal.
So walk us through how your they're driving to the fact that this is demonstrating superspinal CNS
fatigue.
And maybe I know we've covered superspinal CNS fatigue a lot.
So maybe just like in a really small nutshell, in case this is a new term to anyone, if you could
summarize what that is.
Yeah.
So let me let me do, let me divide that into two parts.
Let me just very quickly describe what superspinal central nervous system T is.
And then secondly, let me explain how it connects to, you know, carbohydrate, glucose, glycogen and
stuff like that.
So First things first, the concept of supraspinal central nosed fatigue essentially goes back to
Marcora's psychobiological model of Tigue.
So what Marcora says and what he showed through a series of experiments is that every time we're
doing any kind of activity, we're producing a central motor command that is switching on OT.
And it's it's the MOTI equipment signal that starts in the motor cortex every time we produce that
you feel a perception of effort associated with that signal.
And essentially that perception effort has a maximum limit to it.
We call it a maximum tolerable perception of effort.
So as you increase force production or effort in a movement, what you can find is your effort in
your, the new equipment levels go up together and at a certain point you hit a maximum tolerable
limit.
You can't go beyond that because by definition, it's the maximum tolerable limit.
And so you stop and you can't create any more.
But if you have any other sensation of discomfort going on, I mean, I've joked before, you can do
this literally in any scenario.
I mean, somebody actually asked me a question on Instagram and I said, look, you could do a number
of different experiments around this.
I mean, one of my favourites is actually I was invented or invented but proposed by one of my
mentorship clients a while back.
And he said, well, I could do biceps curls in a seated position on a chair or I could do biceps
curls like in a wall sit position.
And I'm going to get greater effort perception from the wall sit than I would from sitting on the
chair.
And so I'd expect to get fewer repetitions and doing the biceps curls in the wall sit versus the
gem.
Fantastic experiment.
And you can do a bunch of other things.
I mean, you can literally just have somebody poke you with a stick.
But you know, it's like that would create pain and discomfort and that would again, again, bring you
close to your maximum tolerable perception effort, of course, not allowing MOTU recruitment to get
as high as it would do if you weren't suffering that pain and discomfort.
So the whole point about the markers model is that he says, you know, if you've got no other pain in
discomfort, then your Motine recruitment levels will get to the highest possible level at your
maximum tolerable perception method.
If you have other effort perceptions going on because you've got this, you know, discomfort wall set
or you do a run before you do your bicycle or you've got somebody poking you with a stick or it
doesn't really matter.
Any discomfort that's going on, you know, it's still present.
When you're trying to reach your maximum level of Motine recruitment, you're not going to reach your
maximum level of recruitment because your total amount of that perception now is comprised of say
90% recruitment related signal and 10% being poked with a stick signal or whatever it may be.
You know, just from breathing hard or you know the sitting position that you're in.
I mean, This is why we see those studies where they do like social media, like someone will scroll
social media before strength training workout and a big reduction.
So there's there's like.
That's Yeah, that's commentary load is the experience of feeling like, you know, kind of this effort
that you've put into dealing with something discomforting me.
You can create discomfort in a human being in a billion different ways.
I mean, we're really good at detecting things that bother us, you know, So, I mean, you can have all
kinds of of things that bother people, you know, and as I say, I joke about poking with a state, but
you know, it's like it could be, as you say, something unpleasant that you've seen on social media
or just something that's no sucked energy out of your brain that you've been devoting to thinking
about.
The point is that it's a source of discomfort that you're now tolerating and that's now occupying
space in the barrier of effort perception that brings you closer to your maximum tolerable
perception method.
So the more stuff you've got like that, the further away from your true maximum level of equipment
you reach at maximum effort perception.
And that's the really important thing because I think sometimes people go, well, I'll just try
harder, might know you won't.
You'll still reach the same maximum level of perception.
You're still trying exactly as hard as you possibly can.
The point is that you're trying hard and you're now dealing with other stuff inside of that bracket
of things.
That includes you trying hard and that's them suppressing your level of recruitment associated with
that maximum perception.
So you can't say I'm just going to try harder because you can't.
There is stuff we can do to sort of address this issue and that's what we're talking about today.
But ultimately, you know, in terms of macros model, you reach a maximum tolerable perception effort.
That's it.
That's the point where you reach muscular failure.
Now what level of recruitment you reach that corresponds to that is a separate question.
This is how supraspinal central nervous system fatigue works.
Literally, how many other discomforting sensations are you dealing with at the same time as dealing
with the discomforting kind of perception of motive recruitment itself?
And the fewer of those things you're dealing with less superspinal CNFT you're going to have.
So that's the first half of the answer to your question.
Yeah, great.
And it's worth noting as well that that can be factors from within in the workout, but they can also
be carried over from before the workout.
Totally.
I mean, like if you've had an absolutely horrible journey to get to the gym, you know, maybe like
you missed the bus and like, or, or you know, kind of got stuck in traffic or you know, there was
some kind of accident on the way or you worried about.
Like another great 1 is like if you've like sort of time pressure and you've got to finish the gym,
but then get out and then go to some other kind of commitment afterwards.
It's like that's going to create issues for you, the entire kind of environment you're in, why the
story your brain's created.
Because ultimately this is all about your brain perceiving stuff, you know?
So yes, it can be genuinely physiological.
Like, yeah, if I've just run, like if I do an experiment and I run on the treadmill for 5 minutes
really quickly and then I'm still breathing hard and then I try and do biceps, girls, you're not
going to get the same number of reps out as if you hadn't done that, you know?
But that's genuinely physiological.
Similarly, if I've got like if I do a really unpleasant set of car phrases and my kind of lots of
high Rep stuff and my muscles are really hurting and then I immediately try and do bicep skills
again, that metabolic accumulation like to and phosphate and acidosis combination.
It's going to create a pain in the muscle that is then going to again create problems for London
buses, even though it's completely different by the body, but equally a story that we tell ourselves
in the brain.
It's like watching too much social media just before the set or, you know, if you've got some kind
of interpersonal interaction going on that's bothering you, you know, like if you've got a queue of
people trying to get on the machine after you.
I mean, like, these things can all create issues for you if your brain perceives them to be
discomforting, even if they're not generally physiological.
I notice with my one-on-one clients who are more like, say corporate clients or, you know, they work
sort of high up in a sort of high stress situational job.
I notice with them there's a fairly high correlation with the amount of mental stress of their work
and their performance in the gym.
And that's irrespective of, you know, whether their sleep is affected or their diet is infected.
Like they can have the same routine, but they're just feeling more stressed out at work and the
performance goes down.
And often what we'll do then is maybe look at do we train at different types of day?
Are you less stressed in the morning before your day at work?
Yes, let's do that.
But you know it's.
Mostly about how much processing the brain is dedicating to the other stuff.
So I would argue always that if if you can capture them before they pick the phone up in the
morning, you're going to get a really solid workout.
And even if it's not ideal for other reasons, you know, you actually, before they get a chance to
turn the phone on, you know, boot up their e-mail, you want to get them then.
Because as soon as they've got their head full of stuff relating to, you know, whatever problems
they're dealing with, you're not working with someone who's got full capacity to access, you know,
they basically dedicate all of their effort perception to this MOTU equipment signal.
That's what we're saying.
That's what you want to do.
As soon as you're dedicating chunks of your perception to tolerating discomfort and problems in
other parts of your life, then you're not going to be able to dedicate all of that effort perception
to MOTU equipment.
I mean, I guess somebody who's more sociopathic and doesn't feel those be more capable of, that's a
separate question.
But you know, that's, that's literally how so, you know, kind of superspinal CNST works.
It's literally just and what the brain is tolerating in terms of discomfort and pain.
And it can be physiological in the sense of, you know, it could be hard lungs, you know, kind of
pain, burning sensation in the muscle could be doms from a previous worker.
You know, it can be genuinely physiological as we would say, you know, body related.
But it can also absolutely and is often psychologically related in terms of tolerating this
cognitive load of other stuff.
But it all goes through the same process.
So what do carbohydrates have to do with this?
So the really important thing is this goes back to the beginning of exercise science, actually all
the way back in the beginning, one of the first sets of research studies, investigations that were
done were around fatigue in endurance type exercise.
And the researchers noticed that, you know, essentially, you know, carbohydrate made a big
difference to people's ability to perform long durations of endurance exercise.
And if they start to dig into that, they notice that the glucose and acid, glycogen and things like
that would decrease over a couple of hours of cycling exercise.
And interestingly, when they tested fatigue, as in maximum strength at various points in the cycling
blocks of time, they would notice a correlation between the fatigue reductions and strength and
these reductions in glucose and blood and glycogen nozzles.
This gave rise to what we now call the energy crisis hypothesis.
Now we're being rude when we say energy crisis.
It's not kind of like not rude, but it's a, it's a, it's a pejorative expression because they never
really called it that at the beginning.
But basically the energy crisis essentially means that you're running out of energy and the muscle
and the muscle kind of is fatiguing because it doesn't have access to AD.
Now we now know from decades of work on fatigue Physiology that all fatigue mechanisms are actually
trying to stop you doing that.
They're trying to stop you running out of energy.
So the whole concept of fatigue mechanism is it doesn't allow you to run out.
So ATP doesn't deplete the way people think it depletes.
It actually pretty much stays the same level.
Especially strength training situations.
You know, it's not, we're not running out of ATP, but we can start to get low on glycogen and the
muscle fibers and glucose in the bloodstream.
So basically the brain notices when glycogen starts dropping, the muscle or blood glucose starts to
decrease and it reproduces an increase in effort perception, discomfort associated that anybody
who's done a long bike ride and they've been sailing along, no cruising pace for, you know, a period
of time and then suddenly they just kind of literally lose the ability to go any further or not
going further.
That speed just tanks.
That's a famous kind of experience that any long distance cyclists will have had at some point in
their cycling career and professional cyclists talk about or have talked about it for decades.
It's this moment and you know, I think to some extent man manners might experience the same kind of
thing.
It's not something I know anything about, but you know, it's this moment where your brain realises
that glycolin levels have dropped below a certain threshold or glucose levels have dropped below a
certain threshold and it down regulates your ability to exercise by increasing massively urethra
perceptor.
Everything suddenly feels like you're trying to walk through treacle That essentially is your brain
noticing something physiologically, the low levels of glycohol, glucose, and it responds by
increasing your effort perception accordingly to stop you from running out of ATP in the future.
Because running out of ATP is pretty pathologic for muscle fibers.
It doesn't want to do that.
So to avoid it happening, it stops you from exercising at the same intensity by increasing effort
perception.
So and as I say, you can sort of fool your brain into thinking that the carbohydrate levels are
higher than they are by carbohydrate mouth rinsing.
I mean, obviously, you know, you know, you can still just drink the carbohydrate as normal as you do
that like the silver everybody was doing.
But you don't have to if you don't want to.
For people who are maybe, you know, just as a minor practical application for people who may be very
in a period of caloric restriction, they don't want to start throwing carbohydrates around as much
as somebody maybe not in a period of caloric restriction, then you could actually kind of by looking
at carbohydrates.
But that's not really the reason I want to talk about today.
I just want to talk about it as being a clear indicator that even in strengthening workouts, despite
them not being long endurance type exercise, they are still subjected to this superspinal fatigue
problem of the reducing levels of glycogen or glucose in the body that the brain then is producing
another perception in response to.
And as I was saying before we jumped on this podcast, do the recording, one of my favorite couple of
studies in this area actually shows that you can get this effect even when you're just doing 5 or 6
sets of heavy load exercise.
So that for me is really, really interesting because it's in, in this area.
Historically, if you go back to the beginning, generally speaking, the effect was originally studied
in the bigger, longer duration endurance type activities.
People like and, and honestly, super spinal fourty plays a massive role in endurance exercise, much
bigger than it does in in strength training.
And like, I know people kind of still have this crazy idea that kind of heavy strength training is
the CNS fatigue inducer.
It's not.
It's the opposite way around.
The bigger, the longer the duration, the lower the intensity the exercise, the more the CNS fatigue,
the superspinal CNST you're going to get virtually, which is why performances at that endurance
under the spectrum are so modifiable by circumstance and attitude.
David Goggins has done an amazing job of just showing people that how you perceive an endurance
event is probably 80% of what your performance is going to look like.
And that's because it's 80% in as fatigue.
So yeah.
But the important thing is that carbohydrate mouth rinsing has an effect even when you're doing like
Fiber success or how he loads.
Well, that means that every single workout that all of us are doing at the moment is being affected
by CNFT, no matter how science based we are, no matter how low volume we are.
Or maybe there's a limit somewhere.
But ultimately, if I just, I'm probably one of the lowest volume lifters at the mouth out there, I'm
just literally doing all of nothing.
I maybe do kind of 10 or 12 sets total in a workout, you know, a bunch of different exercises.
I am still probably suffering that effect.
You know, once you go over 5 or 6 sets, probably you're probably in that territory where you you're
in into super small or definitely in that territory where you're getting that.
Packed.
So how does this kind of Farsi, So if someone's in a fasted state or not in a fasted state, say
they're eight carbohydrates that morning, the training in the afternoon or whatever it might be,
does that influence the effect of this?
I don't know.
That's a really interesting point.
I mean, I think the, you know, we were looking at the metro analysis together a while back and we
were looking at how the researchers, I think they, they, they found no effect, didn't they found no
effect in the strength.
Training in the in the strength.
Training situation, but in years, yeah.
So I think it's, there's probably a lot to be said about relative changes.
I think, you know, obviously strength training is going to burn through of glucose and glycogen a
lot more quickly because they've the higher intensity of the excise and the fastest fibre
involvement.
So I suspect it's a, it's a relative change thing primarily.
But obviously as you say, they're finding it in the endurance activity area.
So you know, maybe it's also an absolute thing.
But in terms of strength, I suspect it's the relative change that matters more.
So if you suddenly drop a large chunk of, you know, glucose or glycogen into various parts of the
body, wherever the brain is looking, then you might suddenly trigger the effect.
So but yeah, in just going back to the meta analysis, I think they're when they're talking about
fasting, I think they're really talking about up to 12 hours.
I think every night fasting was the maximum they did.
I don't think we're into territory where people are actually kind of.
So this would, this would be relevant then for somebody who eats normally in the evenings and then
get something doesn't work out before breakfast.
Perhaps that would be the kind of scenario you'd imagine it would apply.
But if somebody is saying, well, no, I'm actually following an intimate fasting scenario where I'm
only eating in the evening or something like that, then I would say that this probably is not
relevant for you.
The data doesn't give you what you want to know.
So like if you're going to, you know, eat in the evening and then do a workout just before eating
the following evening or nearly 24 hours of fasting.
I would say the data probably don't exist to tell you how that would interact in this scenario.
But honestly, I would, given that, given that we're seeing this effect even with minimal fasting, I
would say that pretty much everybody is being affected by this, you know?
In clients that I have who do train fasted, so they have the normal dinner sleep and then go to the
gym before breakfast, what I generally get them to do is have normally I'd say like honey and
coffee, right?
And I actually try to get them to have a fair bit of honey because you deplete a fair bit of livid
glycogen overnight.
And my sort of thinking with that, and this is just my speculation is that if we could top up livid
glycogen, it might make bug glucose a little bit more stable and maybe prevent some of these fatigue
mechanisms you're talking about.
And I also wonder, well, in that situation, if you know, you can see me, honey, 20 minutes, half an
hour, whatever before the training session, how what's the proximity have to be to that training
session?
For the carbohydrate eight thing, that's the great thing about these carbohydrate mouth rinsing
studies because they're literally doing it almost immediately before workout in some cases, not all
of them, some of them are doing an hour or so, but you know, as a big chunk.
So it's an hour or so before it's still having an effect.
So it doesn't seem to main.
At least they didn't see identified as a moderating variable in the metro Nos.
So as far as I can tell, it doesn't seem to make that big a deal.
But logically you would, you know, kind of given that the brain seems to be capable of detecting it
instantaneously, I naturally would just say, well, why don't you just do it, you know, as you're
walking into the gym.
So I think the interesting thing is that it is capable of having that effect in that moment.
So the brain is instantaneously adjusting its perception accordingly in response to that signal.
So, but as I say, it's happening even with relatively short fasting periods.
So as I said before, I think all of us are probably experiencing this problem to some degree.
We're all probably getting this this kind of negative effect whereby we could potentially fix it by
using either a sports drink to drink or to do color.
And which is very, very interesting because it tells us we're, you know, we're, we're actually
missing out something here.
Yeah, Yeah, like you said, like all that could be doing this, you know, for me, like I said, I'd
normally have my my juice that I normally combine honey with it and have that with me.
And you know, like you said, if someone has calorically can.
Yeah.
Have to actually consume.
I mean, this is the cool thing.
I mean, I, I remember actually talking when, you know, somebody consulted with me a few years back
and they had a bunch of clients who were just trying to avoid excessive, they felt was excessive
carbohydrate consumption, you know, and I'm don't comment on nutritional stuff at all.
It's not something I know anything about.
And I was like, well, just use carbohydrate mouth or anything, then that's something that you want
to avoid.
So I think, you know, pretty much everybody, no matter what their preferences or, or tendencies or
practices are in terms of nutrition, could actually use this either by consuming the carbohydrate,
if that fits in there, you know, sort of personal nutritional requirements or preferences actually
just not consuming it.
They don't want to.
I mean, it's like, you know, as long as you've got somewhere to dispose of of the carbohydrate that
you're just mouth rinsed with, you know, you should be fine.
So, you know, that's, that's I just think, you know, practically is an interesting thing, but
fundamentally it just underpins how big of an effect the supraspinal fatigue problem is even in
strength training context.
I mean, we always knew it was a massive deal in the context of endurance activities.
As you know, as I said, demonstrated by people like David Goggins have shown us, you know, just how
important the brain mind is in endurance type activity.
So it is important in strength training as well.
I do want to follow that straight a little bit further in just a moment, but I want to make sure
everyone leaves this knowing if how to do the carbohydrate carbohydrate bowel strengthening if they
want to do it.
So in these studies in generally doing like 10 to 20 seconds or their bears, aren't they?
I guess one question would be what if someone were not to swish it in their mouth for 10 to 20
seconds if they were just to actually consume their sports drink or their their juice and honey or
whatever.
Is that still like that have a similar effect?
You even have enough data to to answer that at all.
That that's, that's going into territory that I probably haven't looked at.
I mean, ultimately, you know, I, I look at stuff that is relevant to my area of expertise and you're
starting to go into nutritional stuff.
Really at this point, my expectation would be that it would work exactly the same way.
I think that the body is hypersensitive to the presence of carbohydrate.
The brain is not going to miss it.
I mean, if you think about it, the brain is trying to identify, in fact, we're cheating things by
doing the mouth rinsing stuff.
I mean, that's that's the important the brain is expecting you to consume this stuff and is
expecting to see it as it's being consumed.
So my expectation is that, yeah, if you consume it, that'll create the same fact as if you mouth
rinsed it.
I think the mouth rinsing stuff is US trying to cheat the system a little bit and make the brain
response something that's not real.
So I think honestly, if you were to have the same bottle and you were to mouth which one bottle and
thrill and to actually just drink the other one, I think you'll get pretty much the same facts.
In fact, my expectation is you would probably logically get a better effect from drinking it.
But I don't know that for a fact because I don't think there's any data showing that.
So but yeah, I don't, I don't think the brain would miss it just because you consumed it.
That seems the opposite way around to me.
And is there anything relevant to the taste or the sweetness?
Like when I first heard about this, my assumption was, oh, is this like a reward mechanism?
Is this a positive experience?
It likes the sweetness and is that having an effect on the superspinal CNS fatigue and it seems.
Like that.
So there are, there's definitely whether they've used flavor controlled placebos.
So no, it's not.
Interesting.
So look, there's probably not much more people need to know.
It's fairly straightforward.
There's nothing really more to say about the carbide and malferencing thing, but I think it's useful
just to link this to something that again, we we've been talking about recently, which is this idea
of, you know, coming back to Marcora's model.
Marcora's model, a simple version that we've talked about so far, basically has maximum levels of
maximum tolerable perception of effort corresponding to, you know, either if in perfect scenario
it's from motive equipment or a lower level motive equipment plus a bunch of discomforting
sensations.
And that's kind of the simple version of the model, complicated version of the model, hugely
complicated.
But just one extra feature is that you can moderate your maximum tolerable perceptual effort
slightly by various strategies because your degree of motivation in anyone moment in time just
nudges upwards or downwards that level of maximum tolerable effort.
So what I'm saying is you are prepared to tolerate more pain because you are motivated.
That's it.
Or you are less prepared to tolerate as much pain because you're not motivated.
So you've got this motivation thing that modifies things a little bit.
So what that means is that if you are suffering for some reason, and we were just talking about this
again recently, like say for example, you have a really bad night to sleep.
You're essentially sleep deprived or at least restricted in the amount of sleep you've had.
No, you're going to be experiencing an elevated level of pain sensitivity.
And so you, you know, kind of you're going to find your maximum total percent if it comes down, if
on the other hand, you then experience something motivating, you can bump that back up again.
So you've kind of changed things and you've done those.
And so ultimately all the time whenever we're talking about this stuff, whether it's the
carbohydrate mouth rinsing stuff, whether it's motivation from like, you know, people around you
working in the gym with you, or whether it's loud music or any of these things that are changing
motive equipment, they're all working within Marcora's psycho biological model of T.
It's really just either putting in and removing other perceptions or it's slightly adjusting the
level of motive equipment by sorry, it's slightly adjusting the level of motivation and all of
that's going to impact on motive equipment.
I mean, it's a bucket analogy really, isn't it?
You can make the bucket bigger or you can take things out of that bucket.
Exactly.
The more we do, when we're trying to select, for example, you know, you've got a lifter and you're
like, OK, so we're going to use some carbohydrate mounterencing.
We're also going to maybe give them a cup of coffee to put some caffeine in them.
And then we're also going to play loud music and have a bunch of people working at the same time as
that.
And like all of these things that you do are all basically through very, very slightly different
mechanisms, but we can be the same ultimate model working to increase the level of motor equipment.
You can achieve either by removing sensations with discomfort or by increasing motivation.
But you probably can't stack them linearly the way that you might expect because ultimately the kind
of increases in motor occur and get harder and harder and harder as you add more and more motivation
or remove more and more of the discomforting sensations.
Like if you were to say, well, you know, the first thing that you do, let's say you first thing do
is just test a little bit of carbohydrate and you might see a pretty big effect.
And then if you would test a cup of coffee, you might get a slightly incremental effect that's still
there, but not as big.
But if you were to do it the other way around, you'd see the opposite effect.
The caffeine will be the big effect.
And then the covert matter, it wouldn't be the smaller effect.
It's just because whatever you did first or tested first would be the bigger impact because you've
got more capacity to do something when you've got kind of you're starting from a bigger deficit and
the closer you get to your true ultimate maximum that you're physiologically capable of as small the
increments are going to be.
So I think it probably is a kind of a sort of a non linear effect when you start adding this stuff.
What I think people are going to find is that if they go, I'm already really pumped when I go into
my workout.
I've got a bunch of people I train with who play, have this amazing gym and really loud music and I
always, you know, get my coffee before I go in.
I'm like, well, do I think you're going to see a big effect from carbohydrate Mathur at scene?
Probably not.
Do you think though, I would imagine all of those motivational techniques are probably going to have
more overlapped than say something like the carbohydrate bouncing, which is not working off
motivation, right?
So if someone's got like 2 motivational techniques that they're stacking and they're like, do I do
another motivational thing or do I do the carbohydrates?
I'd be thinking do the carbohydrates.
I think, I think your instincts are probably right.
Ultimately, I don't know, ultimately the model is going to give you the same effects of these
things.
But you're right, maybe the the two things can be separated into the two categories.
Like are you removing a discomforting sensation or are you increasing motivation?
I mean, like the carbohydrate malfunctioning is really interesting because it genuinely does remove
a discomforting sensation that we're suffering from.
So it falls in the same category of things like changing your workout structure to avoid high
repetitions and to leave longer rest periods and those things that aren't taking out discomfort now.
And so that's separate then for, I mean, you're going to measure the same impact of these things,
but as you say, qualitatively they are fundamentally different in the approach that you're taking to
get to the output.
So yeah, I mean like on the motivational side, there definitely is going to be a diminishing returns
effect of adding more motivational stuff.
So you've already got loud music plus friends.
How much more can you really get out of some of the other motivational stuff?
Probably not much.
But if you as you say then supplement that with something that is more down there, removal of the
discomfort side of things, then potentially that does have capacity to be more interesting.
But again, and this is all stuff that people would be looking at if they would just use Marco as
model in this context.
And I think one of my great frustrations with the research around all of these things in at the
moment in exercise is that they're not using Marco's model because Marco's model was primarily, not
exclusively, but primarily looked at in endurance activities.
And people aren't really using it as much in strength even though he's literally got studies of
strength training shams.
OK, I've got one final question for you.
You've been talking a little bit about creatine lately.
People may have seen this in your stories in your post a little bit and you've mentioned that
creatine and increase the number of repetitions that one is capable of doing.
Now you've also just mentioned here that the carbohydrates have been associated with about a
repetition increase, give or take.
Now here you're saying that equals more hypertrophy and the creatine is saying that doesn't.
And in case someone's like, well, hang on, that's inconsistent.
It's not actually inconsistent.
Why?
So basically you've got 2 separate mechanisms which are producing that are being affected by these
two compounds.
So when we look at the effects of carbohydrate, we are affecting the supraspinal CNSD.
So if I alleviate supraspinal CNSD I can get higher levels of recruitment if I can access more motor
units as more muscle virus and I get more hypertrophy.
If I use the creatine then I'm not doing that.
I'm not increasing the level of motor increment, at least not within workout.
Then we can argue about whether it changes things in the post workout pre that separate.
But in the context the workout itself.
I'm not changing the level of motor equipment.
What I'm doing is delaying the onset of metabolite related T Metabolite related T is irrelevant for
hypertrophy.
Ultimately all it does is slow down the muscle fibre shorten most, so if anything actually helps the
absence of intelligent ideas is not going to be something beneficial.
So what's happening is I just delay.
So where you can look at it, you can look at it as basically like the use of the carbide rate mouth
rinse will add reps on the stimulating Rep zone, whereas the three team will add reps on the bit
before you enter the stimulating Rep zone.
So you're just delaying the answer to the stimulating.
Rep Yeah.
Are you adding Rep at the end or at the start of the set?
In many ways, it's the same thing that we see in training situations.
So if I'm using say for example, light load strength training to failure and I start to, you know,
kind of notice that my number of reps per set is really, really going up very rapidly.
I'm gaining progressive overload is happening extremely fast.
And then one of the mechanisms by which that can happen is that I become better capable of
tolerating the pain associated with those burning sensations and the muscles.
Now, by doing that, I'm actually increasing the level of recruitment at muscular failure.
And I'm going to find that each set, each workout that I do over the course of that time as that
adoption is happening, is going to become more stimulating over time because I'm accessing, I'm
never going to get to quite the level as I would do with heavy load, but it's going to move in that
direction.
So I'm going to find that I gradually start to improve my ability to create stimulus from those
workouts.
Conversely, if I look at say for example, changes in fatigue resistance inside the muscle fibers
that are happening with the LIGO strength training to failure.
And what's going to happen is that I start to develop the ability to resist the top of that relative
T.
And again, I'm going to add more reps in my progressive overload is going to go crazy and I'm going
to see, you know, but that's not going to change the amount of hypertrophy as I get from the
workout.
So you actually get both of those reductions happening in the context of light load strength train
to failure programs, one of which is actually giving you more stimulating reps, which is not giving
you more stimulating, just both of them adding.
This is why light load strength train to failure adds volume load in just incredible quantities over
the course of a training program.
You end up with really high boring loads at the end of the program.
That's what you had at the beginning, because your muscular endurance changes so much, and it's
because it's attacking multiple fatigue mechanisms or creating resistance to multiple fatigue
mechanisms, some of which are helpful, some which are essentially relevant, and you get exactly the
same thing.
Yeah, great.
Yeah, I think that answers it perfectly.
OK.
I think that's everything we need to cover.
Is there anything else you want to mention?
No, I'm good.
OK, don't forget to keep an eye out for your up and coming podcast in the next week or two.
And please, as always, join us again for another episode in next week.