Episode: 024 Training, hypertrophy, and recovery for older people
URL: https://open.spotify.com/episode/3L2hM25sWYCcdQEOF562WK
Published: 2025-11-02
================================================================================

Welcome back everyone to another episode of Hypertrophy Past and President.
Thank you for joining us again.
Chris, how are you doing this week?
Doing OK.
Thanks Jake.
A little bit of a cold, but it's not actually showing through in the voice today.
So I was, I was quite worried yesterday.
I was thinking that today I would be croaky, but actually it's not too bad.
I tell it all and you've released another second episode on the other podcasts.
Do you want to just briefly tell people, if they're not aware of that, what that's all about?
Yeah, so started a new podcast on athletic training with Rob Mauseri.
It's called High Performance Physiology.
It's a pretty short podcast again, weekly and maybe 30-40 minutes, just talking about one particular
important physiological concept and then relating that to training.
And Rob gives some great examples every time about how he's implementing those ideas in his training
programs for his clients.
So I think it's a, it's a nice way to, you know, kind of link the Physiology with the actual
strength training practices.
And last week we talked about maximum strength.
We literally have just recorded a third episode on maximum speed and how to train for that and what
the adaptations are.
And we'll release that in a couple of days time.
So if you're not listening to high performance Physiology, please do check that out.
Stink to my Instagram bio if you want to look at that.
And you know, it'd be great to get your feedback on that.
You are becoming a professional podcaster a.
Professional podcaster?
Yeah, I don't think so.
I think I'll only probably do podcasts with people that I know, but yeah, no, it's, it's, it's fun
to talk through these things.
But hopefully, as I was just explaining there and, and obviously tying into what we do, you know, I
think one of the coolest things is to see how the Physiology can be translated into practical
applications.
Because I think that's the the big thing that I'm excited to see happen over the next few years in
our industry is people using that Physiology too inform their own training programs and come up with
creative ideas.
And you've got one more thing coming up in I think a few weeks.
Do you want to mention that?
It's, I think it's going to be two weeks.
I'm going to do a, a webinar with a, a friend of mine that, you know, we're going to talk about
preserving muscle mass during diets.
That's something that again, is I think going to become a hot topic in our industry over the next
couple of years as people get into that sort of understanding of what's going on physiologically.
So I don't want to say anymore because I can maybe give full details next time we run this podcast
because that'll be just before the webinar happens.
But yes, in about two weeks time I will be doing a webinar and preserving muscle mass during
dieting.
Some very exciting stuff to talk about on that webinar and I think a lot of it will be new to many
people who hear it for the first time.
So I'm excited to hear about that, but I will give more details next week.
So that includes like how to sign up, You'll, you'll have info like that next week.
The sign up links will be linked probably from my bio or in a pin post or something like that.
Yes, I can give again full details of that next weekend.
Happy days.
Let's jump into today's topic.
Now the plan I'm going to talk about is going to give it away.
So I'm just going to unleash and tell you all what it is.
And we're going to be talking about specifically how someone might need to train differently as they
age.
OK, so what's different from a hyperture perspective when someone does get older?
And there's some really interesting stuff that you're going to cover in a moment.
But I'm going to talk about how this silver era saw this issue and what they suggested doing.
So we're going to cover a plan from period Raider, which talked about period a few times.
So obviously here is the, the, the founder of Iron Man magazine, which you know, this was mid 30s, I
believe, 1936, something like that.
And then he was the head of Iron Man for about half a decade, 1/2 a half a century.
I think Iron Man still exists, but obviously he's changed hands.
But obviously he was very influential in popularizing a lot of, I guess you could say like
bodybuilding systems and stuff like the breathing squats.
He was, he didn't invent them, but he was one of the key figures that was actually putting out some
of this content.
So in in one of his books, he actually has a section on how to train as one gets older.
Now he's sort of a little bit, I guess, how would you say flexible with what would constitute older
age?
So he says some men might feel old when they hit 40 or 50.
If you know, for some people it might be older than that.
But it's kind of subjective.
You know, when you feel you're getting old, you feel like you can't recover and you can't perform
the way you did when you were younger, these are some things that you can do.
Now, just to be upfront, he didn't write out a specific plan.
What he did is he said these, this is how you should change your plan compared to the young
individual, compared to how you were training.
So what I'm going to do is I'm going to tell you what those guidelines are and then I'm going to
take one of his standard plans and I'm going to tell you what that would look like with these
guidelines.
So the guidelines were that for all the individual, you should look at doing lower repetitions.
So as an example, he said if you were doing 10, then an older individual should be looking at doing
7 to 8.
He also suggested fewer sets that will depend on if a muscle is a high priority or specialization
muscle or if it's a lower priority.
And he did sort of give it a bit of a distinction there.
But he said you're you're probably not going to want to do more than three to four sets maximum for
muscle in general for general health and Wellness.
He said one set per per exercise or per muscle was sort of his recommendation for an old individual.
He also suggested taking longer rest periods between sets and an interesting addition and maybe
we'll touch on this.
I don't know if we'll touch on this now or maybe you'll get to it when you do your part.
But he did say for all the individuals, it's actually beneficial to add in a speed type exercise
occasionally.
And he didn't specifically specifically say what type of exercise, but he just said something that's
more speed related, adding that in can have benefit.
And like I said, I'm sure you'll touch on that in in a little bit.
So if we were to look at how this actually would be presented in a plan, this would look like to
this is coming from his standard squat plan because he was a big believe in breathing squats and
that formed the foundation of a lot of these plans.
And this could look like the first exercise being a barbell overhead press.
Now this would be done for a single set and it would be done for 7 to 8 repetitions.
Then we could go into a barbell curl again single set 7 to 8 repetitions into a barbell bench or
supine press, what they called it back then for a single set of 7 to 8 repetition into a bent over
barbell row.
Now he typically programmed this in the transverse plane and this would be for one set of 7 to 8 and
then finishing with a barbell squat.
Now, like I mentioned a moment ago, he was a big advocate for the 20 Rep squats or breathing squats.
And he did say that for people who had lower recovery or lower capacity, or, you know, that would
include all the individuals that what you could do instead of doing a single set of 20 was to do 2
sets of 10.
So in this situation, 2 sets of 10 for the Bible squat would be more suitable.
Now that's five exercises.
He did say that individuals who are all the maybe can do, you know, up to say, I think he suggested
up to about 7 to 8 exercises in total would be there probably limit.
Somebody said, you know, anywhere between that sort of five to seven is probably going to be
suitable after an old individual compared to say 11:50 exercises for a younger adult.
So I'm interested, I'm interested knowing in your feedback on this plan, but also how this ties in
or does or doesn't tie into what you're going to share a little bit later on.
I think it'll be quite interesting.
Yeah, I mean, there's some really interesting stuff here.
I mean, just starting with the, with the, obviously we've got a reasonable kind of starting point
for a program with those five exercises.
Obviously there's a lot missing, you know, but it does, it does kind of cover, you know, kind of
most of the, I'm hesitating because it, you know, kind of like straight to where I'm looking at
what, what was not there.
It's like, you know, there's obviously no really good lat exercise there.
You know, we've got no hamstrings exercise there, you know, and I'm not a huge fan of scapula plane
stuff because it doesn't really do anything.
Well, I'm guessing that's that's kind of maybe just a variation thing and that most of the time
you'd probably be working in the frontal plane.
But you know, it's it's it's not a horrible kind of starting point for a barbell based training
program by any means.
The stuff relating to the older people I think know is fascinating.
I mean, there's so much here that is exactly what I would expect.
You know, I mean, one of the first things that, you know, you've written down in the notes and
you've explained is this idea of dropping down to a fewer repetitions per set.
You know, I mean, most of the time when we look at the fitness industry, people are tending to push
older people towards using lighter loads because they think that, you know, that's less damaging,
that's less potential for injury, you know, and you know, sure, if you're working with barbells,
then no, I don't necessarily think that it's a great idea to still encouraging people to use heavy
barbells at that age, but that's a safety issue really rather than a Physiology issue.
I think physiologically heavier loads are going to give us less intra workout fatigue and also less
post workout fatigue.
So, you know, given what we're going to talk about shortly, that's a really, really good thing to
do.
So the fact that he's we've spotted that that heavy loads are actually going to be better, you know,
if your repetitions per set and better for the older person than than than than lighter loads, I
think is really, really, really valuable insight.
Same thing really would go with the the other variables.
So fewer sets.
Again, again, we'll talk about this in detail, but you know, the idea of not creating as much intra
workout for tea by doing too much volume and not doing creating as much post workout for tea by
doing as much volume.
Again, I think is going to is going to be a factor that really benefits the older person.
Longer rest periods, same thing.
It's like, you know, just allowing that for recovery to take place between sets is going to make a
difference to anybody's strength training performance.
But the older person might need a little bit longer because they might find their cardiovascular
system isn't as efficient or capable as the younger person's.
The idea of a speed exercise is very cool because or a power exercise is very cool because One of
the big features that we see with older people is the suppression of their motor recruitment levels.
Often if you kind of test an older person, they've got lower levels of activation and a younger
person and a speed exercise is a really nice way of just trying to trigger an increase in motor unit
agreement.
Now we'll talk about other ways that that can be done.
It doesn't have to be a speed exercise.
Well, that's really an interesting possibility now for people who are actually interested in
working, you know, specifically with older people, not just as a, you know, theoretical kind of
thought experiment.
It is worth mentioning that there is a whole set of the literature which is devoted to exploring the
role of power training or speed training with older people, simply because old people do tend to
display greatly reduced levels of, you know, maximum speed.
So from a functional perspective, you know, that might be interesting for certain kind of people
working in that space.
I'm less really interested in it per SE.
I'm I'm not someone who's working in that area.
I don't spend a lot of time reading about the challenges specifically faced by older people.
And I think that in all honesty, most people who are listening to this who are either older or who
are working with older people are probably more likely to be working with masters athletes rather
than necessarily, you know, just general population older people.
But in which case the speed issue isn't really much of a fact because either you're already doing it
because you're training for a sport that requires speed.
Or if you're training for a sport it doesn't require speed, then you probably won't really notice
much of an issue on the speed side because you've already got pretty well developed other
characteristics, which means that you're not really noticing much of a problem in in day-to-day life
from a functional point of view.
Where the speed stuff really comes through is when you're kind of looking at studies of sudden to be
older people.
And the researchers noticed that a bit of speed work seems to dramatically affect their capabilities
in day-to-day life.
If you're a say, a masters power lifter or a masters, you know, kind of, I don't know what kind of
sports masters athletes kind of tend to take part in these days.
But if they tend to be more on this sort of the the strength end of the spectrum, you're unlikely to
notice deficits in your activities of daily life function because you're pretty functional really.
So that kind of speed stuff doesn't really kind of play into it.
But that's, yeah, that's.
If you have an individual who continues to train throughout their their training life and then just
age as part of that, do we see significant reductions in speed as people age?
Like I'm assuming there'll be some, yeah, Yeah, OK.
So it's quite significant.
Yeah, no, it is.
It is a really big deal.
But the point I'm making is that you've got these two separate things to think about.
Either you're a masters athlete who does need to move quickly.
Let's say you're a masters throwing athlete, you know, then yeah, you you're a lot of your attention
will be devoted to try and figure out ways of mitigating that loss in speed, dealing with it,
working around it, all of those kind of things.
You will be obsessing over it quite a lot, but it's not going to have any impact on your day-to-day
life really, because you're already very, very functional.
The other category of people is the people who are perhaps sedentary and old and then you are going
to see speed deficits playing a role in their day-to-day life.
It's not going to be able to move out of the way of something if it falls over.
They're not going to be able to move themselves around very easily.
And, you know, very quickly get out of the way of something.
So you will see a meaningful effect of speed training in that situation.
But for the person who's, you know, aging but taking part in bodybuilding, for example, I just don't
see that the speed issue would come up most of the time.
You've got enough functionality just from the strength trainings, but sort of part to that.
This might be something you want to get into later, I'm not sure, but does the speed reduction, does
that correlate fairly directly with reduction in like high threshold mode unit recruitment or?
Obviously that will play a the role, but I think it it is, is definitely separate in in other ways.
I think you do see a reduction in Moss fibre shortening velocity that is independent of the MOTU
recruitment reduction.
You can one of my favorite things to do when people ask me this question is go and look at masters
track athletes who've spent their life being track athletes.
So they've got really high levels of recruitment.
But when you see them run, it's like they're running through treacle.
They're just just, they can't move any faster than they are and they're really, really slow even
though they've got high levels of recruitment for decent muscle mass.
They're just moving slowly because of the factors that have negatively affected speed at a fiber
level.
So, but I'm talking about 80 plus year old people at that point.
I mean, that's, that's what we classify as very old.
Just briefly in the literature, we tend to classify people as either 60 or 65 onwards as being old
and 8085 plus as being very old.
That's just the kind of general kind of way the exercise science groups those ages of people.
OK.
So looking at this plan as a sort of whole plan in terms of the sets and reps and all that, apart
from some of those exercise selection bits that you would perhaps change or you know that you've
identified a lacking.
Is there anything specific with the sets and the reps and the longest periods and those sort of
guides that you look at the like orphan or the person?
I would definitely do that differently.
So excise selection aside, now I, I like the, I like the lower.
Well, it's basically what I would classify as moderately heavy.
I mean, so heavy would be 1:00 to 5:00 and then moderately heavy would be 6 to 10.
I think moderately heavy is brilliant Rep range for almost everybody.
You know, it's where I spend most of my time.
You know, I think it's, it's hard to go really, really wrong with that, especially if you're using
machine weights and single sets, you know, long rests.
That's perfect for again will work for everybody, but I think it's again perfect for older people as
as we'll explain as we go into the Physiology side of things.
Let's jump in.
OK, let's do it.
So there's a number of different ways that you can start talking about the question of age in
strength training.
You can either start by talking about the differences in the recovery rates, or you can start
talking about the differences in the adaptations and then bring in the discussion of recovery rates
later on.
Historically, when I've taught this, I've actually taught it recovery first.
Then I'm actually going to try and switch that around today and see what happens.
I'm really interested to see if this works better because I think the assumption is when when I
introduce this topic to people, the assumption is often that older people display reduced
adaptations or a speed of adaption.
So like they grow more slowly, they display increases in strength more slowly, they display, you
know, all of the various adaptations more slowly in comparison with young people.
And it's kind of just this this starting assumption that all of that is equally affected.
And the really interesting thing is that it doesn't seem to look that way.
So yes, if you go to this sort of hypertrophy side of the spectrum, you look at the hypertrophy
literature, hypertrophy literature and you look at studies that have measured rate of growth in both
older and younger people.
Then what you'll notice is that the rate of muscle mass increases and the rate of muscle fiber
diameter increases in older people is slower or are slower than they are in in, you know, in younger
people.
Now, similarly, if you look at fascicle length increases or you look at sarcoma genesis in younger
and older rodents, then again, what you'll find is that the rate of growth of both fascicle length
and in humans and psychomenesis or soccer mass in series in animals is slower in older people than
in younger people.
And so you kind of like start to build up a picture and you go, yeah, OK, well, you know,
adaptations are, you know, generally slower, at least as far as hypertrophy and psychomenesis is
concerned.
But if you were to go outside of that immediately kind of sort of obvious area of literature, you
were to start to go into areas like tendon stiffness changes and fiber Tye shifting and other
adaptations that are not the mainstream ones that everyone's interested in, you would actually find
that they don't behave in the same way.
So one of my favorite studies shows that tendon stiffness in older people essentially tracks
increases in younger people.
It just goes on for a longer period of time.
Why does it do that?
Why do you carry on increasing tendon stiffness in older people for a longer time than you do in
younger people?
In young people, tendon stiffness kind of just reaches a plateau after a couple of months and just
starts to, you know, sit there.
Older people, it carries on and just carries on increasing.
Why?
Because they started with much lower levels of tendon stiffness, so they're kind of carrying on to
the point where they start to plateau later on.
But fundamentally the rate of change is pretty much the same.
You can get the same kind of data with fiber type shifting.
You tend to find that the fiber type shifts drift more or less at the same speed in older people and
younger people and then start to plateau off as the kind of maximum amount of type 2X fibers has
been converted into type 2A fibers.
So ultimately, what's really, really interesting is that when we start talking about the effects of
age on strength training adaptations, we can't just say that old people display slow adaptations
across the board.
It's it's one of them as people know.
And I'm starting to I think this is starting to catch on now.
You can't just talk about outcomes and expect to, you know, kind of get a sensible picture of what's
going on if that outcome is an externally measured outcome that represents multiple internal
adaptations.
So you can't say all people increase strength more slowly than younger people and expect that to
mean something.
You know, OK, maybe it's true, but why is it happening?
They increase recruitment to the same rate to the increase coordination at the same rate to the
increase muscle size.
It's like, what are all the factors that go into that?
And are they all affected equally or are they affected differently?
Especially what you're saying here, a lot of these sounds like it's going to affect untrained older
people more, like the tendon stiffness.
Well, OK, if you've had an individual again, trained a whole life, they're not going to be starting
at a, you know, level where the the tendons are more compliant than they would have been otherwise.
Yeah, totally.
So tendons and and fibre type shifting are going to be factors that are mainly in that kind of
category of things that untrained people are going to be affected by mostly.
So, yeah.
But ultimately the point is that we're seeing a discrepancy between things that are.
Kind of affected by age definitely and things that are much less affected by age now that's that's
kind of like my my starting point, my observation that we've got these these differences going on in
terms of the rate of change of the individual adoptions that are underpinning things like strength
gains.
Now one of the big questions then is why do hypertrophy encyclomyogenesis display a slower rate of
that in older people than in younger people?
Now just incidentally, before I answer that question, it's, it's worth noting that if you look at
fiscal length changes in older people over time, they are slower, but they still plateau at the same
point.
So if you kind of see a plateau happening in younger people at maybe four or five, six weeks or
whatever, then the older people would take say 1012 weeks to plateau at the exact same location.
So the, the fiscal link just takes longer to get there, but it still gets to the same point.
It still plateaus in the same place exactly as we would predict based on the kind of way that
sarcoma Genesis works.
But the question then is, well, why are we seeing such slow rate of, of, of adoption in older
people?
Now essentially you've got 2 possibilities.
Either there is a smaller sensitivity to the mechanical tension stimulus.
So what you're saying there is that each workout that you do, the older person does three sets to
failure.
You do three sets to failure.
Actually, you do three sets to failure and I do three sets to failure.
And that's a younger person and an older person.
So, you know, we both do the same workout, three sets to failure.
And what you're saying, if you say the sensitivity of the stimulus is reduced to an older person,
what you're saying there is that that person experiences a smaller adaptive response to that workout
because of the inherent features of their muscle tissue.
Right.
That's one possibility.
The alternative possibility is that the older person is carrying accumulative fatigue from the
previous workout because they're not recovering in time between workouts.
So you end up in the same place.
But the mechanism by which you get to that result is different and it has different training
implications.
Yeah.
So if you think that the person, if the older person is experiencing less sensitivity, then your gut
fear is going to be OK.
Well, we need to give them a bigger stimulus so people start to add more volume.
Well, that's.
Which I would say is a fairly typical piece of advice.
You know, that's something I've certainly heard a lot where OK if you have an old individual,
basically you just add one to two sets per.
Exercise.
You can find that in the literature.
Oh yeah, there's review, there's review papers that have argued that point absolutely, but they're
not starting from the question is like, is it genuinely definitively a lower stimulus sensitivity or
is it a reduced, you know, kind of ability to recover from the previous workout, which means that
you're suppressing your anabolic stimulus literally simply because you're carrying accumulated
fatigue that you haven't got rid of.
And I don't think there's been enough work to actually, you know, kind of I don't think there's been
a recognition of that observation to start with.
But you know, fundamentally at the moment, I think most people are assuming that it's a sensitivity
issue or straightaway I'd be questioning that saying, well, if it's a sensitivity issue, why don't I
see it cropping out with fiber type shifting?
Why don't I see it cropping out with tendon stiffness shifting?
OK, maybe you can rule tendons out because the tendon is not a muscle, but still fiber type shifting
is not behaving the same way.
So I think straight to about to start asking the question is like, are we dealing with a sensitivity
reduction issue or are we dealing with a recovery issue?
That then brings us to the next point, which is to say, well, everybody knows that one of my
favorite areas of literature in hypertrophy science is the maintenance studies.
I just keep going back to them going, look, they teach us so much cool stuff.
Well, we actually have got a maintenance study in older people.
So we've got a maintenance study in older men and we were talking about it just before we came on
the podcast and we're looking at the ages of those subjects.
I think it was like 70 to 75 years old.
So properly in the middle of the old, old category, between 60 and 80.
And those guys were training for a period of time doing three sets three times a week and they
increased muscle mass and then they went to a maintenance where they did three sets once per week
and they kept it.
Now, this is super, super important because we know that three sets once a week is maintenance level
in young people.
If older people are less sensitive to the anabolic stimulus, then what we should see in the
situation of maintenance is that they don't maintain on three sets.
They should only maintain on five or maybe even 6.
So the the people who are saying, oh, no, no, no, no, you know, we know that old people are
experiencing smaller stimulus to strengthening work.
I'm like, well OK, explain, explain the this literature then, because it shows me that the stimulus
that the old person is getting is pretty much identical.
The stimulus is the same where they're not atrophy as quickly, which obviously would not.
Well, why would that happen?
Yeah.
Yeah.
So, so straight away you've got this data point which immediately pushes you away from the idea that
you actually are experiencing a smaller stimulus per workout.
So the, the, the, the idea then would be to say, well, OK, so the explanation for your reduced
growth in older people is more likely to be reduced recovery between workout.
And as soon as you start asking that question, the literature explodes in front of you because
you've got loads of animal and human data showing that recovery rates are slower in older people,
you know, and that then it's like, OK, so we know that's true.
And we know that the maintenance literature is basically giving us the same answer in young people
and old people.
That strongly indicates that our issue regarding adaptations and older people is nothing to do with
inherently reduced sensitivity to a stimulus, and it's actually more about recovery.
So now the idea of adding volume is ludicrous.
You'd actually run away from the idea, go in the opposite direction, and lo and behold, that's
exactly what the silver era was recommending.
Literally what you started by telling us, you know, like, do less.
OK, well that's exactly what I'm seeing.
It'd be interesting if they were to do a study where even just once a week, but you had people,
younger and old adults do say six sets or seven sets, which once a week, and then seeing what the
hypothesis was of that.
Yeah.
So that would be kind of exploring whether there's a dose response per workout difference between
older and younger people.
I mean, we have got some nice data on frequency in rodents.
They put older and younger rodents through the same kind of frequency volume combinations and what
they find is that in the younger rodents they can recover and continue progressing.
And the older rodents, once the volume is slightly too high, immediately start to see the decrease
in in performance that they get.
Enter into this overreaching state, accumulated fatigue state.
So there could be a few moving parts then.
So I think it's it's mainly just that the older person is recovering more slowly from each workout
rather than anything.
Else now there isn't any concern over like measurements being different in terms of do we know
whether there's any difference in how like say cell swelling between older people or younger people
or you know, inflammatory response or how long that that timeline is for that inflammatory response
to take place.
Could that be influencing anything?
So before I answer that I will, I will answer that.
Let me just quickly because this ties into the idea of what's actually happening in the post workout
recovery period.
So as everybody knows who's listened to any of these podcasts or read the FAQ, basically after you
finish a strengthening workout, you've got a period of time in which you've got calcium ion relative
D mechanisms that essentially involve proteases damaging the tissue.
And then secondly got an inflammatory response off the back of that.
And it's the inflammatory response really that seems to drive much of the secondary muscle damage
effect and also the swelling associated with that.
Now, yes, older people have a slightly dysregulated inflammatory process.
So you might have a dysregulated muscle swelling recurring center.
That doesn't affect the maintenance literature, of course, because that.
Is but in terms of the other research suggesting that there was less hypertrophy you.
Might have less muscle swelling.
Yes, you might because you do tend to have a slightly reduced capability of robust inflammatory
response in the post workout period.
Absolutely.
But yeah, in terms of the maintenance literature that is not an issue because we're recovering in
time for the weekly workout.
But yeah, in terms of the other stuff, you might see a little bit of effect.
The rat studies is not going to be affected by that because that's not that's not really.
I mean, we're seeing some really dramatic changes in, for example, strength over time where the
older rats are just the strength levels are tanking, indicating that they're not recovering from one
workout to the next.
So you can kind of sort of see the word for the trees if you like in that, in that context.
So the interesting thing about the older people in recovery situation is that, well, there's a few
moving parts here.
But basically, if you if a like, say, for example, if you structural workout to end up with kind of
the same amount of post workout fatigue immediately post workout in the older group and the younger
group, then you'll still find that the older group recover more slowly from that level of post
workout fatigue than the younger group.
So you had you measured the same post workout fatigue, but you just saw a slower recovery rate in
the older group of people.
And that's really interesting because that kind of tells you that it's not about older people being
more susceptible to calcium ion related to fatigue mechanisms, although you know, arguably there
might be a little bit of that there.
It's more about just the ability to deal with them once they've happened, which ties in with this
idea of the inflammatory process being, you know, dysregulated or less effective.
So you know that that kind of is the broad picture.
It's this idea that you might have the same post workout fatigue, but it just takes you longer to
deal with it.
And that really means that you're not going to be able to do the same volume frequency combinations.
You can't do probably this classic routine that we talk about, you know, three sets three times a
week or three sets every other day with moderately heavy loads.
You're probably going to need to dial that back to one or two sets instead, which is exactly what
you're kind of silver era template was showing us at the beginning.
The other moving parts really to be aware of is that there is a reduced voluntary activation level
in older people.
So generally speaking, so you kind of start off with this problem whereby you're not accessing as
much high threshold motor units, you're not trading as many muscle fibers.
So potentially that could impact on the hypertrophy rate, but also it should reduce post workout
fatigue.
So again, it's like if I do end up with the same amount of post workout fatigue, it does that mean
that I've done something else that's created more of a muscle damaging effect in the fibers that
I've got actually activated?
Because if you're activating fewer fibers, you should see less post workout fatigue.
But I'm not seeing that.
I'm seeing pretty much the same.
So what is it that I'm doing or what is it that I'm experiencing as an older person that causes that
greater level of fiber level damage?
For example, you know, despite the fact that I'm activating fewer fibers.
And one of the answers to that could be the reduction in dystrophin or costumers inside the Moss
fibers.
So I'm getting less protection from those costumers to the strains.
And strains could give me two effects.
It could give me greater stretch activated down tunnel openings, so more calcium and influx into
those affected fibers.
But it could also create a mechanical damage phenomena.
So obviously, you know, people know that I think that the vast majority of damage post workout is
biochemical in nature.
But as you lose dystrophin in your fibers, become less capable of transmitting force, literally you
could start to get mechanical damage in those older people's muscle fibers.
So one of the interesting things that could be done in the future is to actually look and see
whether the muscle damage that older people experience has elements of what looks like maybe very
mild muscle strain injury rather than actual muscle damage, you know, because the two very different
characteristics.
So there's, there's a few things going on there which you kind of look at and go, well, you know, is
the older person experiencing something qualitatively different as well as quantitatively different?
Could there be an influence around susceptibility to super spinal CNS fatigue?
Like even if there's the same amount of damage, same amount of inflammation, could that affect an
older person more?
Well, during a workout, obviously super spinal CNS fatigue is going to be mediated by the sensations
that we experience.
And this is where your program template with the long arrest periods was really interesting because
if the older person, for example, hasn't got as well a developed cardiovascular system, then they
will be experiencing a lot of cardiovascular sensations when they exercise That will create
superspinal CNHD and a longer rest period is going to be very helpful for avoiding that in the post
workout period.
It really just comes down to the inflammatory process and how how it's functioning.
I don't know whether or not the inflammatory system or the process of the older person experiences
with that inflammatory process they're going to are they going to experience a bigger or or a
smaller deficit in motive agreement?
I don't know.
You know, I think that's is, is, is it's relatively difficult to pause that.
Yeah.
So within this session, so obviously you mentioned from a cardiovascular standpoint you're not
familiar with anything else that would suggest a high susceptibility to within sessions ribos spinal
stain as fatigue.
So not really.
I mean, again, it would come back to the inflammatory dysregulation.
I mean, but ultimately inflammation determines not only the repair of the muscle tissue once you've
exited the kind of the the Cal pain process, but it also relates to how we feel because the
inflammation is constantly giving feedback to the brain.
So yeah, I mean if the inflammatory process is creating more superspinal fatigue during the workout,
then yeah, you would see a suppression emoting increment from that purpose as well, which would then
mean that you would see a bigger excise order effect which would then tie into what your.
You could get that from the cardiovascular system as well.
I mean it doesn't have to be information for both the cardiovascular and the inflammatory processes
during workout.
You will see an impact on superspinal synthetic from those two things.
So in the event that the older person is finding the cardiovascular demand more challenging than the
younger person, you'll see an exercise order effect that's bigger.
So you'll find that your last few exercises of the workout pretty much junk ties in perfectly with
your template.
Again, you get the same thing.
If the inflammatory process is also communicating more negative sensations, you'll also see the same
problem.
So whether it comes from inflammatory inflammation or whether it comes from the cardio eco system,
you are going to still see a superspinal fatigue that's bigger during the workout.
Whether it happens to a greater extent or a lesser extent in the post workout period really depends
on what the information process is doing.
And I just don't know whether that changes meaningfully well, which direction it changes in, in a in
an older person.
I just don't know that.
And in terms of tolerable perception of effort, anything to suggest that that would differ?
I don't know, This is now getting into like territory because my obviously my expertise extends to
understanding how strength training works.
You kind of as you start to push into different populations to understand how strength training
works in different populations, you kind of understand different characteristics of their
responsiveness, for example.
But obviously there are still also factors associated with simply being old that I'm not aware of,
you know, so I'm sure there's a whole bunch of other stuff that old people experience that, you
know, I'm just not aware of that might impact on strength training.
I just haven't, you know, come across that yet.
And that's what we're saying before the podcast.
At some point, I'm just going to have to go through the Physiology of old people and, you know, get
to the bottom of everything that is relevant.
But at the moment, I don't know whether there are specific perception of effort issues that older
people, you know, kind of face.
My gut feel is that the model will still apply.
It's just what you're looking for is something that is there, you know, if you just, yeah, if you,
if you just feel tired for some other reason or if you feel, you know, this discomfort, pain or or
any other sensation that is there for any other reason, it will impact on your maximum tolerable
protection of effort because it'll bring you closer to it, you know, so.
I was like, I wonder if there's just a perception of effort just by virtue of being old.
I wonder if you just like.
It would have to be mediated by a.
It would have to be mediated by a feeling.
But if you're feeling fatigued and you like if your your base level of energy is lower, you've got
some muscle and joint needles.
Yes.
But that would all be probably mediated by, you know, in many cases an inflammatory process.
You know, we have an inflammatory process that makes us, the brain detects, that makes us feel more
tired, fatigued.
So yeah, anything like that is probably going to cause those kind of issues.
It's it's like an injury in many ways.
Yeah, basically what we've done now is we've walked through how adaptions are different in older
people that compared to younger people.
We've explained how that then translates to recovery is the explanation for why those adaptations
tend to be slower.
And we've also, as we've gone along, you know, tied this back to the program template that you
explained at the beginning.
So let me just go back to that or a program and explain what I think that means for training the
older person.
So if we are accepting that recovery being slower is the primary issue, but also we're aware that
we're likely to see a reduced excise capacity during a workout and also reduced motor recruitment
during workout.
We've got a number of things to tackle here that we want to kind of wrap up together into a workout
template.
We also want to just be aware that we might see a bit more mechanical damage in the form of tiny
micro strains of the muscle fibers because of the loss of dystrophin and the reduced customary
content.
What it is previously touching that for a moment longer, just why that might then influence like
what's the significance of that?
Because there's there's something there that's important and people may not know.
Sure.
So basically the way muscle strain injuries happen is by repeated micro strains over time bringing
the failure length of a muscle fiber below physiological range of motion.
So in normal muscle, undamaged muscle damage is not the right word in this context.
But in unaffected, previously unstrained muscle muscle fibers, the maximum strain length of a muscle
fiber is longer than your physiological range of motion.
So essentially it's physically impossible to cause the muscle fiber to rupture because it's
straining length, it's damage, ripping length is longer than you can actually move your joint
through.
So it's it's like a physical impossibility.
What happens over time if you repeatedly create very small micro strain by moving that muss fire to
a very extreme length repeatedly, you can and then not recovering from that, you can create a
failure length that is inside of your physiological range of motion, at which point you can then
tear a muscle if you have enough fibers experiencing that problem.
So just briefly, if you've like, for example, there's a tendency on various social media pro various
social media platforms to post videos of people experiencing muscle strain injury, which is I think
pretty poor taste, but people do it and everyone analyzes why is it that that happened?
And they're all kind of looking at the exercise or looking at the running pattern of the athlete on
the pitch.
If you see someone like a soccer player experience a hamstring strain injury, everyone's then like
playing armchair quarterback trying to draw lines or trying to figure out, oh, he was doing this at
that point and that's why.
And it's like, no rubbish.
You know, what happened was previous to that point in time, the activities that athlete was engaged
in were creating very small strains of the muscle fibers which were starting to RIP customers off
the fiber.
That's what happens.
So the strain of the fiber starts to tear away the customers and then the fiber becomes much more
terrible at a short length.
And eventually when you get inside of the physiological range of motion, you can tear the muscle
fiber at any length, not any length, but a reasonably long length within your normal physiological
range of motion.
And it's all about the process of micro straining of the fiber that tears costumers off it and as a
result makes the fiber much more, makes the fiber easy to tear at a shorter maximum length.
Now order people.
When you have enhanced athletes, obviously there's issues around connective tissue with with
enhanced athletes anyway.
But it does make me wonder, is part of where we see more muscle injuries, is that potentially
because these athletes tend to be doing a lot more volume and then tend to be accumulated some of
these damage?
Maybe it's got nothing actually to do with the gear itself, and maybe it's to do with the training
methods.
So it might be that the anabolics are creating an increase in muscle fiber size without without
customers attaching to any new sarcomas, but I don't know.
I mean, ultimately it seems to be the loss of customers, the tearing away of customers that exposes
the fiber to more damage in the future in the form of mechanical damage.
And as I say, old, old muscle tends to have fewer customers in it.
So as a result, you could get to a situation where you're more susceptible to that kind of damage,
you know, in that in that group of people.
But equally, when you have fewer customers, you're also going to get more stretch and strain of the
sarcomas anywhere, which is going to translate to more calcium I related fatigue as well.
So you kind of get both things.
Not only do you get the potential for mechanical damage, which is analogous to a strain injury on a
on a kind of a tiny level, but you also get the normal kind of damage that we all get from doing
strength training anyway, which is the biochemical stuff.
So yeah, we're kind of looking at a training program.
We're saying, look, we need to minimize the amount of within session supraspinal CNS fatigue and we
want to minimize the resulting post workout fatigue as well.
Now the interesting thing is that that, you know, they're not necessarily the same set of factors
that we would, you know, kind of choose to minimize both things.
You can't.
So you have to actually treat them separately.
But at the same time you're also looking to try and increase motor unit recruitment levels to try
and access more muscle fibers and create more of a stimulus across the whole muscle.
So you kind of got multiple things that you're trying to do.
So within the session, obviously, if you're just dealing with superspinal CNST, you'd be saying,
well, there's no point in doing a lot of sets.
I want to keep my volume relatively low.
I also want to keep my Rep range relatively low and use heavier loads, moderate heavy loads,
probably want to just leave a Rep in reserve here or there to avoid that.
You know, kind of not only within workout, but now this ties into them post workout as well.
And to be fair, the volume stuff is going to tie into post workout, but you know, ultimately keeping
volume relatively low, leaving reps in reserve, using every load that is going to help super spinal
fatigue.
It's also largely going to help post workout fatigue as well.
We also may be really careful about stretch position exercises because again, that's where you're
probably going to get all your damage from potentially we're going to get the thread of mechanical
damage from if that is going to be an issue with the low levels of dystrophied, you know, so the
workout plan starts to look very much like something that I would do.
I know I was thinking that actually when we're preparing for this, this episode, it's like, oh, this
is going to be really in your will house.
Looks like my kind of program, you know, it's like it's just to sort of, you know, not actually that
many exercises per session.
Maybe, you know, like, you know, full body, but maybe only 8 exercises, you know, and actually full
body AB and alternating between more contract and more stretch position exercises and people go, Oh
no, you're not getting the maximum benefit from that.
No, I know I'm not, but I'm only doing my stretch position exercises 1 1/2 * a week, which is
actually a great benefit because I get a lot less muscle damage and I'm running lower risk of these
kind of pretend this potential for micro strains creating a, you know, a loss of customers, you
know.
So I think it is not massively dissimilar from how I would program Gen.
Pop it.
Just slightly fewer exercises, longer rest periods, little bit less kind of focus on maximizing
hypertrophy, and a little bit more focus on minimizing muscle damage across the week.
I mean, it's all the same things that we would normally consider.
Yeah, totally, totally.
It's just.
It's just.
More.
Clips a bit further away from optimizing stimulus yeah and a little bit more towards avoiding
excessive post workout damage and also just taking a bit more care in the workout itself to keep
rest periods longer, avoid doing excessive volume or or proximity to failure or anything like that.
And but of course, equally something that would not be in my program because it just isn't necessary
would be, you know, something that is like designed to increase recruitment.
Now in the template that you explained this was a speed movement.
I actually prefer isometrics.
I think that is a much more elegant, safe and easy way of doing it for most people.
Most of the time, as I say, just doesn't feature in my programming because my athletic background
it's just not not needed.
But for people who are perhaps, you know, coming into strength training later in life, I definitely
think that it makes a lot of sense.
You know, to be an interesting idea here and I don't know if this would work, but I think it would
be fairly close would be you mentioned having lengthened position exercises on one of those two
workouts.
And I think that's that's something that for some muscles, I'm conscious about that when I'm
programming.
But I think in all honesty, I feel like a lot of people are able to recover from some lengthened
positions within two days usually.
But this is a situation where you'd be more conscious of it.
But given the benefit of the isometrics here, potentially having like an isometric focused workout
on one of those days where you're using more mid shortened positions and then having that length and
position day on the other workout.
So you're getting the mode unit recruitment benefits from the isometrics.
You're reducing damage, but you're not sort of impeding that recoverability within that next 48 hour
period.
That could be an interesting template to play with.
Yeah.
I mean, I think that would probably require a specific mindset because I mean, a lot of the time
within the context of talking about all this stuff, we have to recognize that people are still
people and it really helps them to see progressive overload happening over time.
And I, that's why I really love isometrics for the Motine equipment benefits.
But unless you've got a load cell that tells you what the number is when you're doing the isometric,
I'm not a fan of them for strength training programming because they don't tell you that you're
making any progress, you know, So I really like the, the physiological side of it.
And so I would do it just as a warm up.
You know, I would be like, you know, let's do two or three isometrics, different ones.
And remember, if your goal is to increase recruitment with an isometric, you don't need to worry
about frequency.
This is the thing that people kind of sort of paint me as the frequency guy, but the reality is it's
only frequency if it's an adaption that, you know, disappears by the time you've got home from the
gym, you know?
And that option doesn't mean that you can't be achieving multiple adaptations with that thing.
Right, not at all no, you can absolutely but in the model that I I would start with my template for
older people would not be using isometrics fibrotrophy.
I would use it just for the motor equipment benefits.
And there's actually a subtlety there that think is worth drawing out because if you start to use
isometrics, this is the same idea.
As I talked about this a long time ago.
If you go to the gym and you've traditionally been doing three sets of an exercise and I ask you
instead for the next two weeks to only do single sets, I guarantee you will blow your numbers out
the water.
Because people go to the gym and they do three sets and even though they're trained to failure on
the first set is not.
Well, it is and it isn't.
I mean, technically it is, as I've always said, failure is task failure when you reach task failure.
But it's not the number of reps that you could do if I said only do 1.
So don't do.
Three, that's absolutely true.
And I see that like literally all the time in my groups all the time.
I say with myself when I started doing single set to Sir, and that's as someone who that was.
The thing that tipped me over the edge, actually, when I actually found that it was me that it
affected as well as other people, I was like, OK, this is real.
100%, that's it.
Yeah, Because I would always take sets of failure, multiple sets.
I would take every set of failure.
And then suddenly I'm doing single sets.
I'm seeing my numbers like I'm always.
Double checking my #2 reps yeah, jump up by one or two reps.
I mean literally.
Some people.
Listening to us.
Don't believe us, right?
Just try it.
If you've been doing like three sets, four sets, five sets, whatever for an exercise, next time you
go in just do one and try and like just annihilate your first set numbers that you would normally
get absolutely guaranteed.
Unless you are really, really good at a particular exercise, the chances are you will absolutely
annihilate your numbers.
It's just absolutely remarkable how big the effect is.
But one thing I think people should.
Know with that though, is that progress does not stay consistently because sometimes I'll get people
contact me and they'll be like, oh, I was progressing so well.
I started doing single set first few weeks like numbers were, you know, blowing out of the water and
now I've hit a wall.
It's like, no, no, what's happened now is this is like ultimately your true rate of progression and
muscle growth and you need to adjust that expectation.
And I think at some point we need to do a podcast on this about, I guess, rate of progression or
progression progressive methods or stuff like that.
One of the biggest mistakes I see people making is having when they start doing what I would say is
an intelligently designed program where they're not changing exercises all the time.
They've actually got high frequency of exercises.
They quote, UN quote, hit a wall within, you know, six weeks, 8 weeks.
And they think they're not progressing because they're used to progressing so much quicker because
of these neural adaptations and things that are not true muscle growth in the past.
Totally, Absolutely.
Yeah, absolutely.
No.
I mean when things start to grind to a halt, that's a great sign.
That's the indication that you are now only achieving hypertrophy driven progressive overload
really.
Well, mostly, mostly mostly hypertrophy.
But I argued that the same thing is applicable to the isometric training situation.
So if you want to use the isometric trigger, an increase in motoring agreement, use it for that
purpose because if you try and use it for hypertry purposes, your first set will not be a maximum
effort anymore.
Not not in a true maximum recruitment sense.
So if you just got one Max effort isometric to do, then yeah, you'll probably give it a really good
shot of triggering and increasing recruitment.
If I give you 3, five sets of isometrics to do bang, the number of mode units that you're recruiting
then comes flying right down.
Yes, it works by Pertry.
It probably doesn't work that well for increasing recruitment anymore, so given that my purpose for
using those would always be a recruitment stimulus, I don't like also using them fiber tree in the
context of the same workout.
I would always kind of treat those two things separately.
Does that make sense?
Yeah, it's interesting, Interesting point.
And presumably then in that in that situation where you are using it for modem unit recruitment,
then you could also employ an internal focus of attention as well.
Yeah, you could, you could because you know, it would that would that would that would really send
activation to the location that you're kind of, you know, trying to trying to activate and trigger
it actually more effectively.
I'm hesitating because when I do them it kind of feels like like a life or death experience.
Yeah, I think it would be exercise dependent.
I'm thinking because sometimes I do it for bicep girls and that will be a situation where that would
work quite well, but I can understand there might be some exercise where maybe it wouldn't work as
well.
Yeah.
I mean, like when I do it, when I'm trying to pull something apart, it doesn't feel like my brain
has the ability to activate the muscle deliberately.
It feels like it's trying to pull the thing apart.
I'm trying to pull apart.
It tends to be quite task focused, which is external, but you know, yeah, I mean, I think there are
muscles, especially single joint stuff.
I think when you try to pull something apart or push something, the brain naturally tends to tilt
towards goal orientated behaviours, maybe out of habit.
But with single muscle, yeah, I think you probably could do that.
Absolutely.
So if some more work to use isometrics, a single set, let's say you know 5 to 10 second, that would
be enough to see those mode unit recruitment.
I would probably even keep it to five really.
I would say keep it to five.
I mean, I notice a drop off between 3:00 and 5:00 actually.
So I think a lot of a lot of people who've with athletic experience do tend to peak earlier in the
in the in the sort of the three, five second zone.
I get an extremely negative sensation if I try and hold more than four or five seconds.
I start to dial back on my recruitment levels because my perceptions of effort coming from other
stuff is starting to rise.
So I would say that if you're trying to increase recruitment, they're on the shorter side of
isometric rather than the longer side.
And that's enough to see an increase there because, you know, again, sometimes you people say these
things like, you know, obviously, you know, if we look at this simulating guest model, we might
assume that someone might need, you know, three or four or five stimulating reps to see hypertrophy.
But things like mode image recruitment is not the same.
You don't need multiple bands to get that adaption.
You just kind of need it in that one moment in time.
You need to hit your threshold.
That's it.
Yeah.
And that's the cool thing about it.
You know, you really don't need to go mad at all with the amount of repetitions.
You can just focus on the quality.
And like you said before, you could actually rotate that.
So you could do a couple, maybe 2 exercises, one exercise, whatever.
Because it's not lost exactly because there's no frequency issue here.
So you can literally do like you could literally say I'm going to do a bit of hamstring kind of
isometrics this week.
I'll do some quads following week or some calves, some biceps, triceps.
You could literally spend 3 months rotating through different exercises if you wanted to and then
just start again.
You know, you don't have to do these things all the time because it's not a adaption that D trains.
Not really.
So honestly I wouldn't.
And actually, from from my experience, because I have done some of this stuff and I know so if you
do it properly, it's actually mentally quite tiring.
You wouldn't want to do a lot of it.
Maybe this, you know, I know, I know that there's some tick tock kids doing some crazy stuff with
this.
But you know, for me, and I regard myself as a reasonably better template for older people, they
might be doing, you know, I wouldn't want to say to the old person, Oh, we're going to do, you know,
Max F isometric for every single muscle of the body.
And then we're going to do a normal strict, no, don't do that.
It's not necessary because you don't need to, you know, kind of do every single muscle all the time
because you don't have that that frequency problem.
And similarly, you know, it's just going to prejudice the rest of the training session because it's
just going to end up being a training session in and of itself, but one that doesn't really get you
the hypertrophy that you want.
So I would just pick one or two isometrics each work out and just rotate them.
I wouldn't I wouldn't go crazy with with lots and lots of isometrics in this situation.
OK, fine.
You know, I'm not.
And I've said before, when people pick up the Physiology that I've explained and start to go in
interesting directions, I'm all for that.
I support them.
Fantastic.
I know that other people think that some of the things that are that are coming out of the TikTok
scene are absolutely crazy.
But the point is that they're at least starting from Physiology and trying to explore different
directions and what they can do that's creative, that's exciting, that's interesting.
And I'm all for that.
But just in the context of what we're talking about today, which is how would you kind of construct
a training program for a muscle mass increases in older people, I think that I would limit the
amount of Max advertisometrics that I did to probably one or two per training session.
Are there any other methods you think would be beneficial here?
Like one thing I'm thinking here would be given and more susceptibility to within session super
spinal CNS fatigue given the lower mode energy recruitment, potentially more single joint staff or
maybe machine exercises, exercises where people are using small amounts of muscle mass or even
unilateral exercises.
Potentially they could have benefit.
So all the normal rules apply.
Absolutely.
So everything applies as we would normally normally do.
The issue is of course that when you start doing single joint, single limb, anything like that,
you're now incorporating the requirement for more exercises in totality.
So the reality is I would probably want to just try and find an equilibrium point and I would
probably personally on the machine exercises to obviously maximize the stability problems, But I
would probably err on the multi joint stuff just because I don't want to give an old person a list
of exercises, you know, sort of this long.
I'd rather give them a, a more condensed list that covers all the bases.
And OK, there's some compromises there, but at the end of the day, we get them in and out the gym in
a sensible period of time.
So I even though you're absolutely right, the single joint, single limb stuff would would give you
the recruitment benefits, I think you would start to see the tail off towards the end of the workout
with just the volume of stuff that you were trying to cram in.
One thing I.
My experience personally is that that works better for me as well.
One thing I use occasionally in my programming is and and.
A lot of people, again think I'm making a mistake here from a frequency standpoint, but I might
program a unilateral exercise workout and then the next workout I might give you different
unilateral exercise and do that one bilaterally.
And so yes, there's going to be some muscle fibers that might not be recruited in that bilateral
version, but I'm using that unilateral for some of that Modi energy recruitment as well.
So that potentially could be one way of doing it where, you know, maybe every other.
So work out a, every other work out.
A, you might do one exercise unilaterally and then on the other one, you might do a different one
unilaterally.
There could be some creative ways people could do some of that.
Totally.
And you're just kind of doing, you're kind of doing the isometrics job.
For exactly taking the actual instead of isometrics exactly.
So it kind of you end up in about the same number of things that you're getting done and you've just
done it in a slightly different way.
Yeah.
Yeah.
And some people may find isometrics more enjoyable or unilateral training more enjoyable.
Like, I know.
Yeah, I've got some clients where I'm never going to give them isometrics because I did it once and
I hated it so.
Yeah, I'm in that.
I'm in that category.
It affects me mentally.
I literally feel like I'm going to RIP part of my body off.
That's kind of what I experience when I do an isometric.
It's quite mentally demanding for me.
I mean, I've done it the.
Opposite though, because I remember when I used to be in the gym, I'd have clients who I'd give them
isometrics.
I just knew that they were not applying themselves because they didn't enjoy it, so they wouldn't.
And so you've got people on both ends and the fence where you it's, it's destroying your soul.
And then other people would.
Destroy my soul it it definitely feels really life or death of idea.
But the issue is it's about, yeah, matching the strategy to the person.
I think there's a number of ways of getting to the same answer.
It's just what suits the person in their in their scenario.
So, but you know, the point is to try and drive recruitment levels up because in the older
population, they do tend to be quite suppressed.
And that then means that we've got to, but incidentally, you know, and this, this ties into perhaps
we can, you know, kind of raise this topic because I get this question a lot, which is if an older
person has spent their life doing strength training, how does that then change how they respond to a
strength training person?
Do they are they just like a younger person or are they just like an older person who's untrained or
they something completely different entirely?
Well, stick around and I'll tell you because I'm in that category.
If you just keep listening to this podcast over the next five years, you'll find out because I'm a
lot older than I actually look.
So there's some interesting, you know, kind of possibilities there.
But anyway, the the thing that I think we can say at the moment is that obviously the older person
who is a lifetime strength training, you know, kind of participant, they're sort of unlikely to have
the motor unit recruitment deficits that a sedentary older person would have at least, you know,
perhaps until they get to very old territory.
So for most of their kind of 60s, maybe 70s, they're likely to still have pretty high levels of
recruitment in my opinion, But I don't think they're going to get around this slower recovery rates
problem.
I think that the slow recovery from is probably something that is age specific, not training history
specifics.
So I think actually if you were to, and I'm maybe leaning too hard into my own personal experience
here, but I think you'll probably find that the group of people who are old but also lifetime
strength trained are probably going to be the most susceptible to the muscle damage problem that you
can find.
I think that group of people is going to people who have high recruitment, but also all of the same
recovery problems that the older person has.
Now.
Some of it will be tapered by the fact that they'll have a ton of customers already in place, and
that does protect them to a certain extent.
But I think that the suppressed information response or the dysregulated information response
coupled with the high level of recruitment is probably going to give you the worst of both worlds.
I'm not trying to, you know, kind of be too much of A Duma, but I do think that, you know, a lot of
people go, Oh no, no, no, I won't have the problem of aging with strength training because I've
trained my whole life.
And I, I actually think you're going to have the, the bigger problem because you're going to have
better access to high threshold motor units being have all the problems of dysregulated inflammation
that all people normally have anyway.
And that certainly plays into my experience, which is that my recovery is just tanked since I kind
of got into that sort of within, within shouting distance of that.
To their mouse tag.
So maybe let's conclude with this someone, because we're kind of given a template there for someone
who maybe is all about coming into strength training.
So let's say you have an individual who is getting to that age where they're feeling like they're
not performing as well as they were, they're not recovering as well as they were.
So what might they look at adjusting, you know, not compromise their kind of I guess, results moving
forwards?
You know, obviously, I guess it's sort of just incrementally making some of the changes we've talked
about so far.
But you know, one thing might be that, hey, maybe you don't need to jump down to a single set
immediately.
If you're used to doing three sets every other day, maybe you just jump down to two sets and you say
to that if your performance increases and your recovery increases from that, or, you know, maybe
it's reducing repetitions one or two per set or keeping one more repetition in reserve.
Or you know, my personal like my one-on-one clients, I don't have that many older clients, but
sometimes I have some, you know, kind of getting to that maybe 6065 mark.
And generally what I'll do with them is just add one extra recovery day between those sessions.
So instead of two rest days, we're just going to add a third dress day and maybe I'll try first of
all, reducing down a set.
But if that doesn't do the job, you know, I'm just going to push those workouts out one extra day.
These would be kind of some of the tools I guess people could look at using.
Is there anything else you would add to that?
No, you're exactly right.
I think really it's a matter of starting with the template that you've developed over your life that
you're happy with and then gradually, just very slowly dialing back a little bit of volume, a little
bit of proximate failure.
So you might take a set off here or there, take a Rep off your normal like sort of reps in reserve,
do a little bit further away from Barry.
And then eventually you're going to find that you have to start messing with frequency as well.
So you might have to go from, as you're saying, training every other day to train three times a week
or training 2 1/2 * a week or whatever it is.
You start to mess around with that.
Maybe even you end up with twice a week.
I think that you can unless you are really really kind of genetic outlier, you're probably always
going to be able to train twice a week with the kind of full body single sets a Rep and reserve.
You know, I think don't think you're going to get to a point where that becomes impossible to
recover not.
Personally had any clients where that's not been achievable?
Yeah, I mean the older I get the more extreme I seem to think my Physiology is.
I think I'm really very much up against it in terms of recovery capacities and I'm still fine three
times a week single sets even to failure.
But I think I probably will gradually started have to leave a Rep in reserve here or there, maybe
start to move towards strategies like or even you know like sort of full body AB.
You know you are moving the damage around a bit, giving yourself a bit more recovery past.
So that I really like that that immediately takes all the pressure off me if I do that.
But I can see a scenario within 510 years, I will be training twice a week.
I don't think I'll be able to train three times a week forever.
I just, I just don't respond like that.
Recovery is an issue for me.
But yeah, I think gradually just about identifying specific factors in the workout that are creating
post workout fatigue and just figuring out the least bad option in any given moment.
So for me, yeah, volume would be the first thing that I reduced.
Then it would be approximated failure, and then it would be maybe like exercise selection.
And then finally it'd be frequency.
I really would pump frequency as far as possible, you know, because as soon as you start reducing
frequency, you've got all kinds of other issues to deal with.
OK.
I believe for all the I-65 to 80 old listeners, that was an enjoyable podcast to hear that we
haven't.
Got to get old.
This is true.
I just bookmarked this saying this for the machine.
Anyway guys, hopefully that was I mean especially for coaches.
A lot of people listen to this I coaches, there are people working with older lifters and older
clients.
So hopefully that was helpful for you guys.
Otherwise, like you said, if not bookmark it, save it for when you do get old.
Thank you guys joining us and I hope you'll join us again next week.