Episode: 031 How steroids and TRT increase injury risk (and how modifying your training might help)
URL: https://open.spotify.com/episode/3MGH8tStRdx6gcYkzzXthU
Published: 2025-12-22
================================================================================

And welcome back everyone to a new episode of Hypertrophy, past and present.
Chris, how are you doing today?
I'm doing very well.
Thank you, Jake.
I'm, I'm doing fairly well, but I was telling you before we hit record that I spent 24 hours in the
last 72 hours sitting in a car.
So I'm doing OK, but I don't know where I am or I feel like the world's moving.
But apart from that, I'm doing quite well also.
So this is, I mentioned I, the other week I made a joke that we were doing hypertrophy present and
present because we were talking about an anabolic plan or a golden era plan.
And today I have another golden era plan to talk about and then we're gonna dive into anabolic
specifically.
Now we are gonna go down one specific sort of route there and talk about, you know, 1 implication of
anabolics and perhaps why maybe we saw some of these plans change over time.
Now it's gonna be maybe a slightly different conversation for us and we're gonna talk a little bit,
a little bit about what we've observed or what we see kind of in trends that have changed over time.
And you're going to hit us up with some interesting, I guess, data on some of the impact of
anabolics that maybe it gets talked about a little bit, but maybe not as much as it should be.
And we're going to see what we can see.
So I'm looking forward to this conversation.
But the plan that I'm going to talk about today is a plan it, well is a bodybuilder.
I guess that gets a lot of airtime and on social media and YouTube and Tiktok, I would hazard a
guess he may well be one of the most talked about bodybuilders.
And I wonder if people are trying to guess who it is at this point.
Now, this is a golden era bodybuilder and it's not a modern bodybuilder because there's a few modern
guys who do get talked about a lot.
But this is, if you haven't guessed yet, Mike Mensah.
Now there's a lot of Mike Mensa.
Anytime anyone comes at me and talks about Mike Mensa, my first question is which Mike Mensa you're
talking about?
Because if we look at the way Mike's training changed over time, it did change very significantly.
So I'm not gonna sort of go into too much detail about how he sort of evolved in his training
methods over time and towards like, I guess his post competitive career because obviously there were
some significant changes.
And you know, some of the stuff you see online, you know, people will talk about training a muscle
wants every 10 days and stuff like that.
That was certainly later developments for Mike.
But Mike is a very interesting character, not just for some of the, I guess the ways that he tried
to understand what was happening and some of the stuff that he got right.
And there's some stuff that perhaps he didn't get right.
And, you know, he sort of does introduce us to a lot of interesting ideas.
But what I find very interesting about Mike is he was one of the influential characters or perhaps
the most influential after Arthur Jones.
And Arthur Jones is still doing full body at this time.
So Mike had taken this idea of doing lower volumes is sort of, you know, high intensity strategy or
method and then he took that and he obviously reduced frequency.
And so if we tracked sort of what a change between the silver era and Golden era, and then you sort
of see this, I guess, initial change in the 60s that we've talked about a little bit so far where we
see people still usually doing higher frequency.
They're still doing each body part or each muscle group two or three times a week, Maybe there was a
slight step back.
So maybe 2 times a week.
And we start to see some splits being used.
And then we see this sort of next evolution kind of in their 80s and even late 70s when now people
start to take even a further step back as fast frequency goes.
And instead of doing things two or three times a week, now we're seeing sort of one to two times a
week.
And so Mike, I believe is one of the key guys sort of pushed us a little bit down that sort of
realm, I guess.
So this plan I think is quite, quite significant, almost as a a bit of a turning point.
And there's a few other comments.
In fact, I'll just talk a little bit more about Mike before I I jump into this plan.
So something that's interesting about Mike is he got on gear very young, I think 15 to 16 years old.
He talks about being on anabolics and he got injured really early on.
So he got injured when he was, I think, still a teenager, late teenager, early 20s.
They're about to injure his shoulder quite badly.
And this is when he was already competing obviously at a low level.
And that injury set him back really significantly.
And obviously he then, I guess, was influenced heavily by Arthur Jones and went into this, you know,
high like HIT sort of style of training.
But one thing that's interesting, if you observe the way Mike talked is obviously he was a huge
advocate for this high intensity, lower frequency type stuff.
But one kind of comment that comes up is how how important it is to him that the lifters that he
trains don't get injured.
And he talked about the the obviously the importance of recovery and how he thinks that that's, I
guess satisfied by doing these high, these lower frequency workouts, but also the fact that these
these competitors he's working with and not getting injured as opposed to other people at that time.
So I think that's an interesting comment.
Now let's look at his plan.
So this is what he calls his most productive routine or his most productive workout.
Now this was, he says he followed this when he was, you know, competing and he was winning Mr.
Universes and he placed or he won the heavyweight Mr. Olympia.
So late, late 70s he was winning these competitions and this is a plan that he says he was following
around that time and he was he was seeing very good results with.
Now the format for this plan is a two way split and he was having he was taking one rest day between
each workout.
So it'll be workout one, rest day, workout two, rest day back to workout one.
And so essentially to be each workout would be repeated a twice in like an 8 day cycle.
So the workout days would change.
Now workout one, just so you've got a bit of an idea in your mind.
This is kind of like imagine an upper lower split if the lower day also had chests and a tiny bit of
shoulders in it.
So that's kind of the split he's following here.
So workout one, we've got leg extension, a single set, about 6 most in fact, I think every exercise
he did for six stage repetition.
So I won't keep repeating that.
So everything was done for six stage repetitions.
So we've got leg ext, 6 stage repetitions.
Now he did do some partials and some negatives occasionally after that.
So he would normally do negatives once a week and he would sometimes do forced repetitions and
extended set, stuff like that.
So we've got the leg extension and then he would superset that with a leg press.
He then would take a bit of time between those two exercises and then go into squats and he did a
single set of squats.
Everything is taken to failure.
And like I said, some things were taken beyond failure with these, you know, additional force
repetitions, negatives, et cetera.
But everything is normally taken just to to failure.
Then we've got 2 sets of leg curls, 2 sets of standing calf raise, one set of toe press, one to two
sets.
He changed it up a bit of PEC deck or dumbbell fly, and this is where he would superset it with an
incline press as well.
And then he would do dips again, one to two sets, changing it up a little bit.
And it would it would add some forced repetitions here as well.
He would do triceps push down a single set and he would superset that again with dips and then he
would finish with lying triceps extensions.
So that was workout one and that was 2 sets for the line triceps extension.
So everything's done for one to two sets, 6 to 8 repetitions and generally to failure.
Now workout two, we had the Nautilus pullover 2 sets and it would superset that with a close grip
pull down.
Then we have a bent over barbelled row, two sets, a machine like a a vertical machine shrug 2 sets
and it would superset that with upright rows and then a machine lateral raise for two sets, superset
it with a machine overhead press and then reverse PEC deck, 2 sets, standing barbell curl for one
set and then dumbbell concentration curls for two sets as well.
So if you cast your mind back to some of the other Golden Era plans we've looked at, we were doing
what 3040 sets in a workout and here we're looking at what less than half of that, about 1618 sets.
So definitely step down in volume compared to some of the other Golden Era plans we've seen so far.
What are your initial thoughts on the most effective routine of Mike Mensa?
So this is actually really interesting.
So I'm what I'm gonna do here is pick out the things that I think are hesitate to use the word good.
Well, I think I'll commensurate with the with the Physiology and then kind of look at the things
that I think are not so commensurate with the Physiology.
So let's just assume, you know, I know this is not correct to say this, but you know, kind of it's
broadly speaking, training muscles twice a week.
I know it's more like twice every eight days, but you know, it's kind.
Of it's pretty close, yeah.
It's, it's pretty close, isn't it?
So for somebody who's kind of saying, well, how does this relate to, you know, kind of what normal
mortals are going to be doing, you know, it's, it's kind of a 2 * a week training programme.
OK, that's not horrible.
When I look at the sort of volume per muscle group, it's kind of around the sort of maybe four or
five sets per muscle group per workout.
So if you look at the recoverability data, that's pretty much bang on.
So when we talk about recoverability, we're sort of looking at three sets.
You can do that three times a week, five sets, you can do that twice a week.
So broadly speaking, I think he's pretty much bang on when it comes to, you know, the, the voice.
But I haven't, I haven't done that calculation for every single muscle.
I've just kind of looked and gone broadly speaking, I'm seeing maybe four to six sets per muscle
group per workout.
So.
I think that's a bad drive.
There's some even that are slightly less than that three or four sets.
But yeah, it's generally in that realms, yeah.
It's this like kind of ballpark picture.
So again, in terms of recoverability, I think that's of post workout fatigue.
I think that's pretty much bang on.
The other thing I think is really important is that instead of adding extra sets for a single
exercise, he adds another exercise instead.
And I think that's really, really important because that is still commensurate with what we would
expect people to do logically.
If you're trying to increase total hypertrophy of a muscle group, don't add another set to the same
exercise you're already doing.
Add another exercise instead because you're going to get, you know, some good carry over of almost
like doing an extra set of the original excise, but you'll get a different coverage at the top end
of the mote unit pool.
So I think that's really, really important in terms of Rep ranges, obviously 6 to 8 is I think is a
fantastic Rep range to work in.
So I think that's really, really good.
And you know, training to failure isn't a bad option either.
I mean like is 1 Rep in reserve slightly better maybe, but you know, I'd rather than do that than
have 4 reps in reserve like some people.
Yeah, and considering half of this is done with single sets, it's yeah, arguably not gonna be an
issue.
It's pretty cool.
So honestly, honestly, you know, if, if somebody said that, I mean, I'm, you know, at this point, I
think I'm kind of like, if you're not doing full body three times a week, what are you even talking
about?
But honestly, if somebody were to do upper lowest bit and they were to come back with a routine
broadly structured like that, like I've just described, modelled on this kind of routine here
wouldn't be the worst thing in the world.
And it would probably be one of the best upper lower splits or twice a week splits that you can kind
of come up with.
You know, just on that actually, it's interesting because I believe he talks about he used to do
this as workout one workout 2 day off and then he talks about how he wasn't recovering and he went
to workout one day off, workout 2 day off.
And that's a criticism we've made of of upper lower splits or these two way splits before in another
podcast where in those style, you know, I guess splits, you've always got one workout where you've
had a workout the day before.
And so there's going to be some CNS fatigue from that previous workout.
So it's interesting that he's chosen to have a day off or buffer between every workout, potentially
mitigating some of that CNS fatigue as well.
Yeah, again, so I mean, I, I kind of ignored that because I was, I was trying to kind of shoehorn
this routine into the kind of standard mortal routine of of toys we.
But you're absolutely right, the way he started to do it with that extra day off definitely makes it
more attractive than the standard upper lower split or the standard, you know, kind of split of
training each muscle twice a week, but with four separate workouts.
So yeah, I mean, I think there's a lot of of good things to be said about this.
And of course, really my main criticism is the kind of use of intensifiers.
The.
Supersets the, the, the four streps negatives, all of that stuff is, is not going to have any
positive effect.
So, you know, at the moment, I think there's been a little bit of a resurgence around the metabolic
stress nonsense.
People are starting to send me direct messages saying, oh, this person is claiming that metabolic
stresses are still a still a stimulus hypertrophy.
It never was, it never will be.
It's it's nonsense, you know, and also people are kind of claiming that you can, you know, create
sarcoplasmic hypertrophy by training in a particular way.
Again, that is absolute nonsense.
All of these ideas just keep coming back as somebody goes and reads a study from a couple of years
ago and goes, oh, look, this is maybe a thing I could talk about on social media.
Honestly, you know, none of this stuff is ever going to go anywhere.
So that would be my main criticism of this routine.
I think that the kind of the chasing after the pump, chasing after the kind of the fatigue locally
in the context of, you know, those specific sets that he's doing it in.
But other than that, actually, I was surprised to find I used to quite like this for what it does.
Again, not wouldn't be on my radar to program like this.
But you know, if somebody really does want to train, you know, kind of by splitting out.
We were actually talking about this before the podcast now, and we were trying to come up with an
explanation of why there is still so much resistance to people training for Wadi, you know, But
whatever the reason for that is, we can talk about that on the server podcast.
Whatever the reason is, people still do like to split up their routines and train different body
parts in different days.
This is probably one of the best ways of doing it I think.
Yeah, it is interesting looking at it and being like, you know what, there's actually quite a lot
here that is done very well and you know like you said, single sets or double sets across the board.
Obviously that buffer workout, a buffer recovery day between each of these workouts, even exercise
selection, you didn't really touch on any of that, but it's a fairly good excise selection.
I'm just looking now.
I mean, what are we, what are we missing?
Is anything obvious we're missing?
Like back is good, shoulders is numbing chest?
Think he's got any frontal plane pulling?
No.
So he's got the pullover.
So that's interesting, having to pull over the machine pullover, not a barbell, A dumbbell pullover.
Because in the other plans we've talked about so far, it's been barbells which are going to be quite
different and there's got a sagittal pool.
And then I'm guessing the bent over the row would be transverse I mean.
Exo selection, you know, there are things that you could do to make it better, but the the essence
of it is that higher variety, he is generally leaning towards machines.
There are, yeah, there are a few areas that I would probably tweak, but you know, I've made those
comments 100 times before.
Interesting seeing the PEC deck in there.
I don't know if we've seen that yet, perhaps maybe once.
Obviously we I think we've seen fly a couple of times, but that's an interesting, I think
combination.
They're starting with the PEC deck or the order doesn't really matter I guess with a PEC deck and an
incline press, arguably a pretty good combination here as far as chest goes.
Yeah, no, there's, there's some really good stuff in here.
I mean, like as I say, you know, you could tweak these and you could go, OK, well, can I do both a
seated and a light leg belt in there?
You know, can I tweak it in a way to, you know, increase, you know, the variety a little bit more?
As I say, back is something I always look at quite carefully and I don't see a frontal plane pulling
exercise, which is definitely a negative here.
But you know, generally speaking, I think this is this is pretty good.
You know, there's nothing really left out.
The curls knit a barbell curl and a concentration curl.
Arguably, they're kind of doing the same thing as well.
Yeah, pretty much.
I mean, yeah, I mean, you could, again, you could tweet that and do that better.
It's just like the, the essence of it is, is, is relatively kind of directed towards the the ideas
that we've been talking about.
So even though it is a golden era programme, it's actually not horrible.
Yeah, yeah, I think it's a.
It's a good example of a split that he's making that split work in a relatively intelligent manner
or way that does is, you know, coincide with how the Physiology would predict this would be a better
way of doing that split.
And I love what I really like is that he didn't get dogmatic in doing everything has to be two sets
or everything has to be one set.
I often when you look at plans, a lot of the time I think people want plans to look a certain way.
And so, you know, I see people true, you know, maybe using certain Rep schemes or sets or, you know,
tempos or whatever it might B and they apply that to every single exercise.
And I'd be like, well, why did you do 2 sets for that exercise?
Oh, because I'm doing 2 sets of everything.
OK, but that exercise or that muscle has two exercise doing it.
Like, why do you need 2 sets for that?
So I like here seeing that, you know what, he wasn't sort of constrained to, oh, everything is 2
sets of this.
It's like, well, actually nice.
Some of these exercises only need one set because I've got 2 exercises for that muscle or whatever.
I think there's a few things that.
He did the human The human brain's obsession with symmetry is definitely.
A problem?
Yeah, definitely.
So boys, where, where do we go from here?
What do we want to Where do we start?
So basically I just wanted to introduce the idea that there is some reasonably good data showing
that anabolic steroids have a negative effect on tendons.
Now, that isn't going to come as a shock to anybody who's read around this area, you know, even
superficially.
But I want to just go a little bit deeper into that statement and explain why I think it's happening
and how it relates to, you know, what we've said before about steroids.
Now, this is not my specialist area.
I'm just commenting on a very, very sort of specific thing.
Then what we can do is bridge that into your specialist area and talk a little bit about whether
there is a reason or whether this this observation or these observations are a reason why some of
the golden era programmes look different from the silver era programmes.
So I think it's, it's one of those kind of exploratory conversations really to see whether there's
anything that that kind of comes out of it.
So basically starting at the beginning, if we look at the injury risk data, then what we can see is
that anabolic steroid usage increases the risk of all tendon ruptures and also ligament ruptures as
well.
So it's a, a collagen problem, if you like, it's affecting negatively all collagen tissues.
And interestingly, those, some of those numbers, those risk ratios are, are quite high.
I mean, like it really does kind of jump off the page at you and go hang on a minute.
This is something I need to worry about.
This is not like a a very small risk increase.
This is like, you know, pretty pronounced problem.
And it even happens at relatively low dosages.
So some of the data that's been collected obviously has been collected in recreational steroid
users.
Other data has been collected in people who have been prescribed testosterone, for example, in the
context of testosterone replacement therapy, TRT.
So the risk exists across the entire spectrum, not just in recreational users, but also in people
who have been prescribed it at very relatively low dosages, which is again, something that probably
is going to be, you know, interesting from a, you know, kind of perspective of a wider audience.
So basically we've got that starting point, we've got a risk.
OK.
So why does that risk exist?
Well, essentially if we look at what happens in, interestingly, there are actually some human
studies on this as well as animal studies, human studies generally done in people who are
recreationally using, who kind of say self report that they're recreationally using.
And then the researchers go and kind of measure what's happening with their tendons or what have
you, and then say, OK, this is how they differ from other people who are, you know, perhaps also
doing strength training, but don't have that that anabolic usage history.
So across the board, what we see is that anabolics increase collagen synthesis rates in the same way
that they increase muscle protein synthesis rates in muscles.
And they decrease collagen breakdown rates in the same way that they, you know, probably suppress
muscle protein breakdown rates in muscles.
Now, that kind of sounds like you should end up with a stronger, bigger tendon in anabolic users as
well as you end up with a stronger, bigger muscle in anabolic users.
So it's like, why is this different?
You see?
Now, the interesting thing here, though, is that tendons or tendon stiffness relies almost
exclusively on its structure and not on its size.
So a muscle relies very heavily on its size for its that kind of strength, whereas a a tendon does
not.
It almost exclusively relies on changes in its structure.
So when you look at what happens to a person doing strength training, what you, when you look at the
way that tendons change over time, they restructure themselves to become stiffer because of
fundamental architectural alterations.
They're not changing because you know, you're kind of adding more collagen.
People think that's what it what is happening when it's not.
So ultimately the tendon has to restructure itself.
And I think the restructuring process is largely determined by the collagen breakdown.
So what happens is you do a a sort of workout or exercise training session that stimulates the
change in the structure of the tendon.
And what happens is the tendon kind of goes through and issues a whole load of breakdown signals
that pull away the structures that you didn't want because they're slightly weaker.
And it restructures it then using the collagen synthesis into a new pattern, new format.
What we see with anabolic usage is that that collagen breakdown process is interrupted and
prevented.
And as a result, when you then go and look at the collagen tissues of anabolic users inside the
tendon, you see that the patterns are disorganized.
So what you've not been able to do is restructure the tendon because you can't go through the
breakdown process.
This is the really, really important thing, I think is that the process of collagen breakdown is
what enables you to restructure the tendon into a, into a stiffer format.
And the anabolic usage is preventing you doing that.
And so ultimately, what you end up with is a bigger tendon with a lot of fibrosis on the surface and
not actually a stronger tendon.
So the tendon responds by getting bigger, but it doesn't actually respond by restructuring itself to
get stronger.
So fundamentally, you know, very simply what we can say is that anabolics are probably doing the
same thing more or less philosophically in muscles and tendons, increasing synthesis rates,
decreasing breakdown rates, but the tendon suffers as a result of that, whereas the muscle benefits.
I mean, broadly speaking, in a nutshell, that's really what I think is going on.
And as a result, you end up with this fibrotic, larger, less effective tendon than you would get
with, you know, a, you know, sort of thing in comparison with what you would get with just normal
exercise training without the anabolics being used.
So ultimately, that then kind of begs the question of, well, OK, so how do we respond to that
information?
Well, broadly speaking, from an exercise point of view, we know that heavy loads are necessary to
create the increase in tendon stiffness.
So if you're using a heavy load, you're going to get an increase in tendon stiffness and that's
obviously going to be beneficial because it stops the tendon getting yanked around and potentially
ruptured in sort of situations where you know you might be at risk.
Now, if the anabolics are stopping that adaption happening, then the benefit of the heavier load
starts to kind of fade away.
But equally, if you kind of go down the route saying, well, OK, so I can use light loads and no
problem.
Well, yes and no, because ultimately the damage that tendons experience comes from the stretch and
recoil of the tendon, not from the force that they transmit.
This is the kind of thing that I think I'll be banging my head against the brick wall forever about.
But people think that, you know, oh, I'm I can use a light load and the tendon is not going to be at
risk.
Well, not in the immediate sense that if you use a light load, the tendon isn't going to be at risk
from that light load.
But if you carry on doing a ton of light load work, then yeah, you're going to end up with problems
because that tendon damage is going to just build up and build up and build up because of the
stretch and recox.
The lighter the load you use, the more the tendon strains.
So ultimately from a perspective of saying, well, OK, you know, is heavy and light load the right,
you know, kind of conversation here?
I mean, do I choose heavy loads or light loads?
Well, I'm not sure there's a right answer in the context of anabolic users because ultimately, you
know, the heavy load, you know, isn't going to give you any benefits because you can't repair the
damage that or the sorry, you can't, you can't process the stimulus that they provide.
Conversely, the light loads, you can't really, well, maybe you can repair the damage that they
provided.
I don't really know.
But it it doesn't really kind of make a lot of sense because all you're doing is accumulating a ton
of damage.
So ultimately, I think where we are is that it's very, very difficult to try and figure out what the
right answer would be in the context of those types of training.
And then you can kind of go, well, OK, well, does that then start to, you know, mean that we can do
specific types of training?
Does something like blood flow restriction make sense where you kind of get the best of both worlds?
You kind of get a very small number of repetitions, but you also get a very light load or you know,
was that really what these guys were trying to do with the intensification techniques?
Was it kind of like, you know, create a ton of local muscular fatigue so you end up with very little
load tendon this experience?
I mean, these are the kind of questions I think that we can start to ask at this point.
Yeah.
I mean, it's interesting you talk about like load, right, Because if we look at what are some of
the, the key changes we see that happen over time.
And obviously not everyone is doing the same thing.
Yeah.
But if we look at general patterns and I mentioned a few of these patterns earlier on is we do see
obviously frequency start to drop.
We see volume within the session go up and we see frequency go down to about twice a week initially.
Now I guess even before we had that conversation with how the training is changing.
It's worth noting that yes, 19541955 we start to see anabolic use occur in bodybuilding.
It's probably not until sort of 1960 give or take that it's, it's more widespread, you know, being
used.
And then that's we're talking like really we're talking only one or two compounds that are really
going to be used at that point in time.
Once we get into the 70s, suddenly we've got 19 nores, we've got DHT driven is, we've got a whole
stack of extra things being used.
And then when we get into the 80s, it expands even further trend below in the 80s being used, growth
hormone 82 onwards being used and then we see AIS, rheumatized inhibitors being used in the 70s and
80s as well.
So if I were to take a step back and look at what, where do we see some of these changes in training
occurred?
How do we overlay the changes in anabolic use onto that timeline?
I would say that we see this big shift sort of 1960 onwards where we start seeing these insane
volumes that we've looked at not today, but in some of the the previous podcasts.
So within session volumes, we don't see this massive change really in in frequency.
And then kind of what we saw this turning point here today with Mensa, I'd say in the 80s, we start
to see this frequency start to decline again.
And now we start to see sort of one time per week splits being used where a muscle group is really
just trained once a week.
Now, in the lead up to this podcast, Chris, I didn't tell you I when I was spending 24 hours in the
car, I was listening to a number of other podcasts and I was just checking, you know, what's out
there as far as people talking about anabolics and bodybuilding and goal linear and all this stuff.
And I'll admit I was pretty disappointed with some of the content that is out there.
I should say most of it.
But I listened to maybe half a dozen different shows.
And look, there was, there was some stuff that was quite interesting, but I did listen to quite a
lot and 1 theme that came out, I think across maybe 3 or 4 different episodes with different people
I listened to.
And these are like professional bodybuilders is they had each independently made a comment about how
one of the best things I'd ever seen for their results in the gym was actually going to training a
muscle more than once a week and actually training they usually sit twice a week.
One person actually said a third time, but interesting to see that obviously the the norm for the
last few decades has been training a muscle once a week and people are now identifying, you know
what?
Actually that doesn't seem to work as well.
So I think it's interesting to, to just track when did these frequency changes occur, when do these
drugs I guess escalate?
And is there potentially a bit of a commonality there, a bit of AAI guess, a correlation?
Now to go back to the load piece that you were talking about, if we look at how load changed, I
mean, a lot of the silvery guys are doing load repetitions, you know, they're doing 5 repetitions.
Obviously Rich Park, you know, did a lot of these load reps and you know, even Steve Reeves talked
about doing 5 to 10 repetitions.
You know, Hoffman, obviously a lot of his stuff was 5 to 10 repetitions with the York guys.
So there's a lot of stuff being done in this, you know, single digit repetitions.
And then when we get to the golden era, we do see that a lot of this changed like it we go up to
8121520 repetitions.
And you know, to your point, I wonder if part of that, and I don't know how much these guys, you
know, we made this comment last week, I think that maybe these guys found what was working without
even knowing why it was working.
And, and you think maybe there were some other things going on as a performative aspect and, and you
know, maybe some psychology into it as well.
But I wonder if they identified that, you know, what if we're doing these high repetitions or higher
repetitions, these shorter rest periods.
A lot of the time these guys are talking about, you know, 45 second type, you know, rest between
sets with these mortgage repetitions.
Is that potentially limiting the load that they can use to a high enough extent that it's reducing
some of these injury risk from a connective tissue standpoint?
What do you think?
Yeah, I mean.
Let me respond to the performative point first, because I just want to be clear what I'm saying
here.
Basically, I think it's, and I think there's basically we're not arguing whether this exists or not,
we're arguing how big the phenomenon is.
I mean, I, there is a, there is a performative aspect of bodybuilding.
The question is how big is it?
I mean, does it really drive programming decisions to a very large extent or does it drive
programming decisions relatively small extent?
And when I say it's performative, what I mean is that when you've got a really gigantic bodybuilder
who is, you know, presenting their routines and arguing that this is the, you know, their a
personality that should be followed and listened to and that people should do their routines and you
know, whatever else.
I mean, it's obviously it's kind of a business in that respect.
Then they want to kind of present the image that, you know, they have something special, and that's
something special that doesn't come out of a bottle.
You know, they want to make it clear that it's something that they're doing, you know, that is
inherent.
And ideally that it's hard work that they've put in and they want to demonstrate that they're doing
hard work, you know, and so they want to be seen to be working hard.
Now, one of the ways that you can be seen to be working hard without, you know, kind of sort of
creating problems for yourself is to stress the cardiovascular system.
So you do a series of four or five sets with higher repetitions and you leave short rest periods.
You are going to be looking like you're working really, really hard for the camera.
So the camera can show you and you're absolutely blowing like a train, as we would say in the UK,
and ultimately isn't really doing anything to the hypertrophy stimulus at all.
But at least it looks like you're working hard for the camera.
And so people can see that and be like, oh wow, no, he's worked really hard to get where he is.
I'm like my friend, that cardiovascular activity that they're experiencing right now is doing
nothing for hypertrophy.
But I'm glad that you think that your idol is working hard.
I mean, that's the important thing, isn't it really?
So from the performative aspect, I think we've got to identify that it does exist.
It's just how big is this effect, you know, and does it really drive decisions or is it just
something that has been added on on top is a little bit of an icing on the cake?
I don't know, but it definitely exists.
So moving on from that, it's like, well, OK, so leaving that aside, what are we, what are we really
seeing in terms of the, you know, kind of load question?
Well, ultimately, I think the first thing is just to say, well, if, if anabolics are removing the
ability of heavy loads to stimulate an increase in tendon stiffness, then you do kind of lose 1 of
the major benefits of using heavier loads.
So if you can't get the adaption that heavy load is is creating, then you kind of have to start
asking the question of whether it even makes sense to use heavy loads.
Because if you can get the muscle to a really strong state and your tendon hasn't adapted in, you
know, kind of correspondence with that, then you can kind of end up in this place where a lot of
hypertrophy researchers are.
Which is that the reason anabolics cause tendon problems is because the muscle gets too strong and
rips the tendon off.
That's that that you kind of can end up in that in that state, I think.
But tendon stiffness is, you know, you need a heavy load to stimulate that adaption.
So if you can't get that adaption, then you know what's the point in using heavy loads in the 1st
place.
What I.
Can't play there.
It's worth noting that if you were to ask the average person who knows anything about this why
people who use antibiotics are more likely to experience injuries, I think that's the one piece I
would say.
Yeah.
No, I think that's right.
And that does come out and the hypertroid researchers do state that, but I think they're they're
underestimating how much disorganization is created in the collagen fibril structures of the tendon
by the anabolics anyway.
But as I say, that's because the repair process is not happening, you know, kind of correctly or the
restructuring process is not happening correctly.
The question is, I'm not clear whether there is a difference between the repair process of an
existing tendon and the restructuring process of a tendon that's adapting.
So do anabolics.
I mean, what would be really interesting actually would be to see what happens when long distance
runners take anabolics.
I'd be really, really interested to see what happens there because you're getting a lot of tendon
damage and repair, but you're not getting very much tendon restructuring at all.
So is the tendon.
Does the anabolic steroid prevent or interfere with the repair process?
Because if it doesn't, if it doesn't, if anabolics in distance runners really doesn't create any
problems in the tendon, then in that scenario you could argue that it makes a lot of sense for
bodybuilders to use light load because the repair process isn't being interfered with.
Does this make sense?
Yeah, yeah.
It's like can we simply replace the existing tendons, collagen that's been damaged with new tendon
collagen in the context of a, you know, kind of anabolic steroid environment?
Or do we actually still need that collagen breakdown to get rid of the damaged collagen fibrils and
replace them with nuance?
I don't know.
I know that in the context of strength training situations, you do see very much disorganized
collagen as a result of using the anabolics in the combination with strength training.
But is that because the Tenon is trying to restructure itself and is being unable to do so because
it can't get the breakdown rates high enough?
If that were the case, obviously this is speculative.
If it were the case, then what tissue range do you think someone might be using for?
That yeah, you could see that going right up to the light end of the spectrum.
Again, if if the if the tendon is being damaged, but the repair process is not being prevented by
the anabolics because the breakdown rates don't need to be that high to just replace existing
collagen fibrals, then you could go to town on it.
I mean, you could be using light loads all the time and it would actually probably make a lot of
sense.
You know, maybe blood flow restriction would give you a little bit of an advantage there because
you'd create less damage because fewer repetitions.
But ultimately, again, you see the this would fit really well with the kind of superset type, you
know, kind of extra local fatigue type drop set programs that you see where people are trying to
create stimulus for the muscle with minimum amount of repetitions.
Yeah, that would make a lot of sense in that context, because you would get less tendon damage for
the same or for similar muscle stimulus.
Now another change we see, and this is mentioned actually this isn't talked about specifically in
Mensa's plan today, but Mensa does talk about it a lot, is a new emphasis on tempo and slowing down
tempos and eccentric lifting.
And what impact would that have on connective tissue?
So I think you know, the, the, the intentionally being careful about your lifting I think is
probably going to be a beneficial, have a beneficial effect acutely.
So obviously, you know, tendons and muscles both kind of rupture for more or less the same reason.
You create long term damage over time, material based damage over time.
And then eventually you do something that just kind of snaps it.
A lot of people kind of fall into the same trap with muscle strains and tendon injuries and they're
like, and they're like biomechanically analysing exactly what the person was doing in particular
positions.
Like, oh, it was, it was going into this position that created the problem.
And like nonsense.
The issue was that they were doing something for a long period of time prior to that that was
creating damage that wasn't being fully repaired.
And you eventually got to a point where it tore.
And yes, the moment when you tear it usually involves A heavier load, a less well controlled
eccentric, all of those kind of things.
And you kind of put yourself in a situation where you suddenly experience a large force in a
stretched position, either of the tendon or the muscle and you know, snap.
But you have to bear in mind is that that wasn't that thing that actually created the problem.
It was the thing that you were doing for weeks or months prior to that, that particular moment in
time.
People don't like to think about those sort of thinking about things in those ways, but that's more
or less how it works.
So I think really it's it's difficult to say, but I think ultimately, yes, being careful about a,
you know, tempo, especially in the eccentric phase of the repetitions is definitely going to reduce
the risk that some particular, you know, moment in time creates a large force in a stretch position
that creates A rupture.
But again, as I say, repeating myself, the issue is not really that moment in time, it's everything
that went before.
So it's more about.
You know, what are we doing in terms of the the program and that's probably where that reduced
frequency comes in because you're kind of at least giving a little bit more time for the tenants to
kind of restrict themselves.
I think it's also worth mentioning, and this is outside of my wheelhouse again, but it's also worth
mentioning that I think potentially if you go back, you know, there's probably going to be
differences in the durations of time for which lifters were using anabolics.
Well, that's a good point because early on in the 60s they were generally cycling and you know, they
were usually.
If you give yourself a period of time away from the anabolic, then the tendon at least has a period
of time in which it can then, you know, kind of restructure and adapt without that constant state of
collagen breakdown being inhibited.
If you give the, if you give your tendons the ability to achieve high levels of collagen breakdown,
they will fix, I imagine, a lot of the issues that you've created prior to that point.
Whereas if you're on all the time, then I think that changes things and you're basically never
giving your tendons a chance to do what they need to do.
And again, you know, we do see a lot of these changes occur in the 80s when we do see gear escalate.
We start to see cycles become these permanent, sort of, you know, there might be sort of blasting
increasing cycles where people are staying on permanently.
And you know, we see the introduction of growth hormone, which is working a little bit differently
than the other anabolics are as far as connective tissue goes on.
Isn't it like it's not preventing the breakdown as much as as say, testosterone is, but it's further
increasing synthesis.
And if there's already sort of this enhanced or increased synthesis anyway and this inability to
break down and remodel properly, then adding more synthesis on top of that is just going to
potentially exacerbate that issue, won't it?
Very possibly.
I mean, again, I mean, just just to kind of set all of this in context, this is an exploratory
conversation.
You know, I don't think either of us are presenting a view that says, you know, this is how we think
things are.
You know, we've got some interesting data in the animal models and a little bit in humans showing
that tendon damage or sorry, tendon, you know, kind of structures are disorganised in anabolic users
and that there's a high risk of rupture in in all kind of collagen tissues, you know, and let's just
kind of how can we connect this with the way that people have changed training programs over time?
I don't really know.
I mean, I think it's really difficult to say what is what is going on at the moment, but there's
definitely something there.
And I think that's that's that's why the conversation is so interesting.
Now, one other change we see occur, and obviously there's a few things that could lead to this.
I don't want to, I don't want to overstate this, but we do see much more of an emphasis on machines
and we would see this develop even further.
And you know, obviously once we get to the 80s and 90s, then you know, arguably majority of work is
being done on machines in a similar way to the a century for this.
The slower tempo is being used just to add a little bit of control and potentially reduce that, you
know that I guess actual catalyst which could lead to the rupture.
Is it possible the machines could add a little bit of protection there?
So I mean, I think ultimately the machine allows you to kind of bail a little bit, you know, more
safely in situations that you're not comfortable with.
You know, it probably allows you to do ranges of motion that you maybe feel more comfortable in.
I mean, it'll be interesting just to kind of do a little bit of an analysis and see whether there is
a a shift towards using more partial ranges of motion, especially in the top part of the range of
motion.
Yeah.
I was thinking that I wasn't able to identify anything like that, but you would think it would
logically make sense.
Hey.
You would.
So there's kind of some questions around that, but ultimately, I don't think the training lines up
perfectly with what I would expect.
But equally, I don't think the Physiology gives you an obvious answer.
So like, you know, if you said to me, OK, you know, accepting that anabolics make it very difficult
for tendons to increase in stiffness because they can't restructure themselves, how would you
program a strength training routine for bodybuilders?
I'm like, I actually don't know at this point.
I actually don't know at this point how I would change the training programme for somebody who's
using anabolics.
Because I certainly would say that if they are coming off the anabolics, then I would very much
recommend that they do pursue, you know, ways to unpick the damage that they've created.
So, you know, I think it would be, it would be helpful to try and get to a point where the tendon
was stiffer, you know, in those periods of time when they're not using anabolics.
But whether people are really doing that at all, as you say, at the.
Moment and don't forget you said that these changes are occurring even with TRT.
Even with TRT, So if people are kind of going as you say, blast and cruise and they're kind of going
up to silly levels and then coming back down to a TRT level, I don't think they're really going to
get much benefit from saying, oh, well, I'll get all my tendon stiffness increases during my TRT
phase.
We probably not, you probably not.
So again, it's kind of a very, very difficult problem to solve.
But equally, you know, would you say, well, OK, we'll just go crazy on the light load stuff.
Well, I'm really not sure whether that's going to work because you know, you go and do a lot of
light load work, you are going to be creating a lot of damage in the tendon.
Does the analytic allow you to repair that damage?
I don't know.
That's a question that I've not managed to answer yet.
Now maybe the data is out there.
I haven't done a lot of work to, you know, make sure I've found every single paper that exists.
But if somebody does know of a paper in which they've got distance runners or endurance athletes
using anabolics, I would be fascinated to see what their tendons look like.
Because if their tendons have, you know, relatively minimal indication of a pathological changes,
that would be fantastic to to observe because that would give us confidence that the tendons are
capable of repairing themselves, at least in the context of anabolic usage.
You mentioned a few studies early on and some even just in TRT showing this increased injury risk.
Were any of those studies you mentioned, were any of those done in like in people who weren't
actually lifting, in people who just in in sort of like day-to-day life?
Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, absolutely.
If there's injuries that they're carrying outside the context of lifting, would that potentially
suggest that?
I mean, obviously people can be participating in a higher well.
Obviously you don't know, yeah, you don't know what activities they're engaged in.
This is why I think it's use.
It's important to have some sort of, you know, kind of control group.
So having a group of distance runners, you know, ones using anabolic 1 is not, you know, it'd be
fascinating to see whether the risk of injury is is higher or at least just not so much the risk of
injury.
But like, can we see whether the pathological changes exist there as a result of the steroid usage
or not?
And is it, you know, as pronounced as we see?
The question what it comes down to is, you know, is it just a restructuring block or is it a repair
block as well?
I don't know.
If it were a repair block, would that be on in a cute time?
Maybe the worst, I'd be worst of all worlds.
Because then you kind of, there's nothing you can really do.
You can't really.
At that point, my performative argument comes into play because at that point you're going literally
all we're doing here is playing around in the gym and pretending to do stuff to keep people
believing that strength training has anything to do with bodybuilding.
And I don't think we're, I don't think we're at that point.
I mean, I keep kind of coming back to the numbers.
We've chatted about this before the podcast and we're like, you know, if you were to kind of
estimate the amount of muscle mass you can add from strength training versus the amount of muscle
mass that some of these guys are adding from, from anabolics, you know, is it the same number?
Is it, you know, a third of the number?
Is it 1/4 of the number?
I don't know.
Those kind of those kind of numbers are pretty interesting to play around with.
But you know, if you're kind of saying that, you know, there's no repair, if there's a block on
repair and there's a block on, on, on restructuring, then really what all we're doing in the gym is
playing around pretending to lift weights.
Because at that point you kind of don't really want to create issues for the tendon.
Otherwise it's just going to RIP off.
And I'm not I'm not sure we're there yet.
I've wondered why, because obviously we see the the within session volume go up so drastically.
Yeah, you know.
Exactly, exactly exactly, which is a really good indicator that it's probably not a repair block.
Yeah.
And I've wondered is that better than doing single sets more often like is which would have a lower
chance of injury?
And what I was trying to find information on and I was unable to is do more of these injuries happen
in the first set or the last set?
Like are these things that are typically happening in that first Max effort set where someone's
using the highest load that they can, they're using, you know, doing the most managed repetitions as
they can in more of an unfatigued state?
Or is it more likely to happen when performance is reduced due to fatigue and coordination I guess
is reduced?
Well, that's the issue, isn't it?
I mean, that's maybe coming back to your put comment about machines.
I think what we tend to see in general with both muscle strain and tendon rupture is that, as I say,
someone will engage in a period of heightened excise activity for, you know, a period of time.
And then they will go and do something, you know, explosive.
They'll do a short Sprint.
They'll, you know, lift a heavyweight, They'll do something slightly out of the norm and the tendon
just tears off and they, everyone blames the thing that they did out of the norm.
And it's not just the amount of volume that they've been doing previously that's the issue, but it
exposes the weakness in that particular context.
And there's, you know, as I was saying that, you know, there's a lot of scenarios where people will
go from, say, doing a lot of calisthenics and then they suddenly test their strength in a bench
press and ping, you know, they RIP their RIP their peg tendon off.
I mean, that's the kind of thing that we tend to see happening.
So yeah, if you kind of would say, well, OK, you know, someone was doing a lot of bench presses and
the bar path was really solid for all of that period of time.
But then they got slightly out of the bar path that they've been in previously and ping something
rips off.
Everyone's going to be like, Oh no, it was a technique issue and the coordination was on.
Yes and no.
They went outside of the kind of and it put a strain in a slightly different direction or a slightly
different.
But the issue was that you hadn't got the 10 in the correct state because either, you know, you 10,
your anabolics was preventing the, the restructuring, or you created a lot of damage that hadn't
been repaired and they just exposed the injury or sorry, the, the, the weakness not created the
injury from from nothing, if you like.
So the, the, the, we're very Hanford in the industry because biomechanists love to kind of pounce on
these scenarios and try and explain exactly why somebody was doing something in a particular way
that caused the injury.
And it's like, no, the problem was the exercise training program they were doing prior to that
point, all the anabolics they were taking really.
So yeah, the machine kind of bar path being fixed is a really interesting way of starting to reduce
that that risk of happening.
Yeah, I mean, you would think logically if if someone's in training a muscle, you know, every other
day or three times a week and they go down to just once a week, well presumably there's fewer
opportunities for any injury to occur.
They just even if it weren't impacting in any sort of actual structural changes as far as tendons
go, there's still 1/3 as many opportunities throughout the year for an injury to occur.
Yeah.
And of course, you know, the local metabolite related fatigue builds up massively if best if using
those short rest periods and you've got some cardiovascular stuff going on as well.
And you know, you kind of bring the weight down massively over the course, the workout you overall
kind of problem that the tendon has got to handle is going to be smaller.
But again, it's like, does what does the post workout recovery process look like for the tendon?
And not just not just from a, you know, an unassisted point of view, but from assisted point of
view?
I mean, I, I really don't know.
This is, this is kind of where we're at.
And I'm like, if people were approaching this podcast thinking that was, or we were going to provide
a whole load of answers to this question, I'm sure they're going to be disappointed because I don't
think there are, you know, any obvious answers at this point in time.
What I'm just hoping that we can do with this particular episode is raise this awareness and get
some other people who have much higher knowledge basis about anabolics.
Although given your comment earlier, that may be a thin, a thin group of people.
But, you know, maybe there are people out there.
I'm sure there are people out there who've got very high understanding of how anabolics work.
And they can start to listen to this and go, actually, I know these things and these things relate
to what you're saying.
And then they can come up with an answer or a model that actually fits the data better than we can.
You know, I just don't know enough about anabolics to be able to pull all this together.
But I, you know, I think it's just important to raise awareness of this and try and get people
talking about it.
And from your perspective, obviously, you know, it's a key event in the progression of bodybuilding
history and obviously fits very well into that.
And hopefully in the future we can figure out exactly how that how those trends related to this
particular observation.
When I was listening to all these podcasts, in two of them, two separate podcasts, even people, both
professional bodybuilders, one I think at an Olympia level, they independently made the comment that
it was just like a, you know, off the cuff, everyone knows this.
It was like, everyone knows that if you take gear and you don't do anything, you're gonna grow
muscle, right?
And I was like, they know that.
I know.
I was like, can you repeat that?
Because the amount of people online who seem not to know that.
I think honestly, that's where the performative thing really starts to get going.
You're like, you know, you kind of when you listen to people online who confidently state that you
can't grow muscle with gear just by, you know, sitting on the sofa, you kind of realized that their
brains have been completely hijacked by that performative aspect of body.
Yeah, Yeah.
Very interesting.
So, OK, so volume and load, I mean, obviously those are two things that we can, we can't sort of
reduce both of those easily.
We can normally reduce one or the other.
And you've mentioned a few Times Now BFR being a potential tool that one could use that would
actually reduce both of those.
Now obviously we don't see a lot of BFR in the golden era, but you want to just briefly touch on why
that's something you've mentioned a couple of times.
So basically BFR accelerates metabolite related fatigue because it keeps the blood inside muscle and
it stops metabolites from leaving the muscle.
So you keep all of your metabolites there, which is obviously something that doesn't happen in
especially light load strength training because as soon as you kind of do an eccentric phase, the
blood leaves the muscle and you don't get that metabolite, you know, accumulation remaining.
So you basically reduce the number of reps in total for each set.
And that basically allows you to do similar, if not the same number of stimulating reps with a light
load, but obviously a fewer total number of repetitions.
So here's a really interesting way I think of, you know, allowing bodybuilders to expose the tendon
to fewer repetitions while simultaneously getting the same muscular stimulus.
Whether there would be other health issues associated with BFR for that particular population, I
don't know.
I'm not anyway, you know, qualified or even capable of assessing that risk profile.
So I know that's a separate question, but I do think that potentially that is something worth
investigating in that context.
Now there's obviously other ways one could reduce load and volume and that would be creating say CNS
fatigue, which then reduces one's ability to actually, you know, lift as much load as they were able
to previously.
And we do see seeing a lot of CNS fatigue, but that's.
That's where the cardiovascular bit comes in, isn't it?
And that's where you kind of, but you're obviously losing out there in terms of the stimulus to
workouts providing to the most.
Precisely.
So what you said there as a BFI is you're saying, hey, this will achieve XYZ goal while preserving
the stimulus.
And potentially what we're seeing in some of these workout methods with the Super sets and the short
dress periods and the higher repetitions and whatever else is still achieving their reduced load and
volume, but they're losing stimulus by doing that.
Yeah.
I mean, to be fair, I am seeing more and more people going back to talking about fatigue is a thing
rather than fatigue mechanisms.
And that's got to stop because fatigue is just a measurement.
It doesn't tell you anything.
You know, it's like, what is the mechanism of fatigue that's acting in this scenario?
You can't just say, oh, this is worse because fatigue.
I'm like, how?
You can't up there, You've got to carry on and tell me physiologically why you think that these
fatigue mechanisms are occurring in that context.
You can't just say fatigue is here, therefore it's bad.
No, what type of fatigue is there?
Why is it bad?
I mean like if post workout fatigue is still present you can pretty much say it's still bad because
all post workout fatigue mechanisms are bad for stimulating hypertrophy.
But intra workout you can't just say oh fatigue is present therefore stimulus is lower.
No which type of fatigue mechanism is present?
Because if it's just metabolite related fatigue, it's not a problem.
Which is important because I don't know if you've seen this, but online there's actually a bit of a
narrative now that metabolite fatigue is is bad that actually somehow causes CNS fatigue, something
I'm not sure.
Well, it does.
Eventually if you if you get enough metabolite accumulation, you'll get a burning sensation, but
it's not the metabolite.
The problem is the feeling of.
So if you're like, oh, have I got metabolite related fatigue present that's causing CNS fatigue.
Well, can you feel something?
Because if you can't feel something is not there, you know Ultimately CNS fatigue is about
sensations.
So if you're worrying about metabolite related creating CNS fatigue, just ask yourself, can I feel
some discomforting sensation in the muscle?
If you can't, it's not there.
So metabolites on their own don't create a problem.
It's when they get to a point where they stimulate the sensation of burning.
That's when they create the CNST.
So this might be a controversial question.
So if we see like a lot of these programs, these golden era stuff they're using, you know, say 60
seconds rest periods, 4560 seconds there about.
And obviously there's super set and stuff as well.
I'm not taking away from that.
But if we were to use say, you know, single joint exercise, something that doesn't have high
cardiovascular demand at all and perform say you know, moderate repetitions with that and then take
these 4560 seconds rest, do it again, do it again.
Well, that's I will arguably enough time for a good amount of both spinal and superspinal seen as
totally.
Anticipate hopefully so if you're not experienced if you're doing that and you're not experiencing
any cardiovascular sensations worth writing home about and you're not experiencing any burning in
the muscle, then you're literally just creating mostly metabolite related fatigue.
A little bit of calcium amylate tea, but that's, you know, by the by.
So yeah.
And honestly, my rest periods, literally when.
I'm training on my own.
My risk periods just moderate according to my sensation levels.
So if I'm doing a a large multi joint pulling exercise, then I'll take longer than most people would
expect before I do it.
Yeah, another set or another exercise.
If I'm doing a press, a little bit less.
If I'm doing a knee extension, a little a leg curl, a little bit less.
If I'm doing single joint exercise, which you rarely see me doing on the upper body.
If I am doing a curl or a transition, I'd barely take any rest at all because there isn't any
sensation there, you know, So you can absolutely do those like that.
And I think this is the thing where rest periods, again, the evidence based crowd have kind of tried
to drive their narrative, which is where they want to come up with a number of minutes that
everybody should rest and this nonsense.
It's like what's the Physiology that determines the reason rest period in the first place?
Yeah, well, This is why I think that's controversial because obviously we have this GF couple.
Because people don't want to learn Physiology.
But but we had this big shift, right?
And like in the in the evidence based world where it's like, OK, we now know longer rest periods are
better.
And so to now come back and say, yeah, you know, in most cases longer rest periods are going to be
better.
But here's times where you don't need to do that.
That's a pretty controversial take.
Yeah, I'm laughing because I think the word no is doing a lot of heavy lifting in that sentence.
I mean, it's like, what do you mean when you say no?
And it's going to say.
Yeah, the outcome should.
And it's an outcome in a very specific context, ultimately.
On that, that's a really important point because almost all of those studies where they're looking
at dress periods, look at the exercises they're doing.
They're all standardized programs, so yeah, they're kind of using the traditional kind of selection
of exercises that.
It's all multi joint leg press, squat, bench.
Absolutely.
You'll probably want a longer dress period.
Yeah.
So, but The thing is like, physiologically, why does that happen?
It happens because of the very thing that Hypertrol researchers refused to admit, which is that
fatigue is actually a negative in many situations for Hypertrol if it's the right fatigue mechanism.
So you look at the fatigue mechanism and you go, what is potentially problematic here?
Well, supraspinal and spinal CNST is your problem here.
If you wait for those to dissipate and you know that they're dissipated because, for example, heart
rate has come back down to a sensible level or you can't feel any burning sensations in the muscle,
then have at it.
Go to your next set.
There's absolutely no reason why not to.
But they're refusing to engage with Physiology because it requires, you know, a ton of reading.
That's that's my hypothesis anyway.
So OK, this leads us to your favorite part of our of our podcast episodes, Chris, where it's my
invitation to you to speculate.
So if you were to speculate on what you think might be the, how do I word this in a way that you're
gonna participate with me, maybe the most intelligent way to program for an enhanced lifter to maybe
mitigate some of this increased risk of tendon rupture.
You've talked about load and volume.
So you've talked about BFR potentially maybe be a tool that one could look at.
You've mentioned there those rest periods maybe or arguably keeping them as short as one is able to
to the point that super spinal CNS fatigue is not negatively impacting them, would you say?
So I think there are a couple of quick wins that you can get which you know, unsurprisingly are
already present in the programme that we looked at the beginning of this podcast.
You know, I think you can, you can go to machine exercises.
I think you can, you can take advantage of the observation that you just made, which is that you can
go to single joint and even single limb stuff and take relatively short rests between sets and not
have too much CNST being present.
And therefore that's going to work.
You know, I think you can be careful about your, you know, lifting mechanics.
You can be careful about your lowering phases and you can be careful about not, you know, jerking
too hard at the start of a kind of a concentric phase as well.
You know, you can just keep things very sort of smooth as much as possible and just baby it a little
bit I guess is what I'm saying.
You know what?
Could that be?
Why pauses became so big?
Oh man, I'm.
Maybe so, I mean, there's, there's some, some really interesting stuff here.
This is, this is what I think this conversation has been so valuable for.
I mean, I know that this has been a little bit disjointed and not very kind of satisfied in terms of
presenting a model that is kind of explaining everything.
But we're at the beginning of, of a, of a, of a concept here.
We're trying to figure out what's going on.
You know, this is like me, you know, sort of like whatever, how many years ago it was now 10 years
ago sort of coming out and saying mechanical tension is the force for loss to relationship.
And everyone looking at me and going, you're mad.
I'm like, not sure I am.
I'm pretty sure I'm right here.
And I think, you know, this is one of those moments where you just have to kind of put this stuff
out there and go give me feedback.
Tell me what you think.
You know, if somebody comes along and says actually, no, you've got this bit wrong because I'm a
steroid expert and this is what is happening in this situation, Fantastic.
Let's kind of take that on board and see whether we can move this in a useful direction.
But answering your question, you know, I think, yeah, the machines, the single joint stuff, even the
single limb stuff, you know, takes advantage of that ability to push metabolaric TI certainly think
BFR is worth investigating.
I'd want to just look at it and make sure that there wasn't any interaction effect between, you
know, the cardiovascular risks that bodybuilders face as a result of using steroids and what BFR
does.
I mean, that's definitely worth checking before you jump in with both feet.
Yeah.
And you start using that.
It's.
Basically in some exercises as well, I mean, I don't know if you've seen the data on what happens
the intracranial pressure in like a leg Crest.
So yeah, no, I have.
Yeah, yeah.
So probably not an exercise I'd be doing.
I'd be combining BFR with.
No, but it's not really the one that would logically make sense anyway, so you know.
But you could argue me still do it, though.
I'm sure that I'm pretty sure I've done it in the past.
I'm sure there's that some that would make more sense.
But you know, if, if, if someone's listening to this, I'm like, I'm just going to do BFR on every
single exercise.
You know, maybe that's maybe not the approach.
Definitely would do some investigations first before you use that.
I don't want, you know, people to, you know, explode because of some kind of interact.
And that's The thing is like, yeah, that's the issue with an under researched population, you know,
being sort of faced with these challenges, it's really difficult to know what the responses are
going to be to those kind of scenarios.
But yeah, so that would be something that I would be interested in.
But ultimately, as I say, until we move any further forwards with our understanding of what the
repair block it looks like versus what the restructuring block looks like for tendons in the context
of anabolic usage, I'm really, really struggling to answer these questions.
So this is probably, it's been really useful for me.
I just try and get my head around exactly where the blocks, not blocks.
I've just used the word block in that a different context, but where the limitations are in my
knowledge and my understanding of how this process works.
If I want to move my understanding further forward and create a model that actually makes sense,
I've got to try and find an explanation of whether it's just the restructuring that tendons are, the
restructuring of tendons that antibiotics are interfering with, or whether it's the repair processes
that they're interfering with as well.
And if so, is it the same extent or is it different?
That's really I think the key question to answer.
Yeah.
And potentially I mean you've talked about coming off cycle and that that potentially I don't want
to say reversing some of that damage, but it.
Just allows a window of opportunity, doesn't it?
Allows a window of opportunity in which your tenant is now going to start behaving in a way that is
not inhibited by the anabolic.
So you could then rely on the heavy strength training to do what it's supposed to do and create the
tender stiffness increases that you want.
How that then changes as you go into the next steroid cycle I will absolutely no idea.
I've spent a very long time trying to identify any supplements that could potentially aid with some
of these issues and it's been incredibly difficult, more difficult than I expected it to be.
There's a very, very small handful of some potential supplements and peptides that could help, but
the issue is this is a pretty unique problem in that the issue is that it's increasing synthesis and
it's stopping breakdown and most of the things.
That are really excited about it and it's like no.
Exactly, Exactly.
Yeah, Most of the supplements that are good for joints are good because they're kind of doing that,
but to a much less extent.
So, you know, arguably you'd say the general joint supplements probably not going to be good in this
instance.
Like arguably you're gonna gonna have a negative.
Yeah, they're gonna just make the problem slightly worse, yeah.
Is there anything else you would consider?
Are there the key things?
Look, you've danced around the frequency thing a few times, do you think?
Yeah, I don't see, I don't see how you can answer it to the bone.
I don't see how you can answer that question at the bone.
But you could suggest that if muscle protein breakdown is reduced, then the negative impact of a
lower frequency is less, right?
So like what Mensa did here with this twice every eight days, That could be this middle ground where
it's like, hey, you're still getting a, a good, you know, regular stimulus.
You're not pummeling connective tissue every 48 hours.
Maybe that was an intelligent.
Because at the end of the day, if somebody would say to me, how do I decrease injury risk while, you
know, using these compounds that increase injury risk, I'd be like train less, full stop.
Train less.
I mean, like I've, I've talked before that you can literally do 2 sessions a week of one set with
the report to in reserve and you're going to make progress, very slow progress.
So train less and especially if you're kind of anabolic steroid is creating massive growth compared
to your strength training stimulus, which it will be.
And this is just important observation in the human studies that we've got where you've got a bunch
of untrained people start doing strength training and they, you know, kind of divide them into three
groups.
One group just does strength training, One group does anabolics and strength training.
One group does anabolic without strength training.
And basically you kind of end up with a similar muscle growth in the exercise only and anabolic only
groups and double the muscle group in the exercise plus anabolic group, you know, And so people go,
oh, OK, so anabolic creates similar muscle growth to, you know, exercise training.
Well, no, because if you did the same thing in strength training people, you get tiny amounts of
muscle growth in the exercise group and probably the same amount of muscle growth in the anabolic
group.
So you probably see 10 times the difference.
So it really depends on your starting point.
And most people aren't just kind of going from sitting on the couch to jumping into an exercise and
anabolics program.
They probably do two or three years of strength training before they, you know, go to the dark side.
So ultimately, when you're kind of saying, you know, what is the, what is the contribution of
strength training and anabolics in a bodybuilding program for a bodybuilder who's already got
several years of strength training behind them, I would say the strength training stimulus is pretty
minimal in comparison with what the anabolics do.
So that would be my starting point.
We say to somebody, if you're, you know, a competitive bodybuilder who's using anabolics and you
want to minimize injury risk, just train a lot less.
Yeah, yeah.
I mean, that's an illogical.
Yeah, so.
Again, this kind of pushes me towards the performative answer.
You know, I keep going back to this thing is it, is it just?
But I have to rein myself in because I'm so cynical about human nature that I just kind of assume
the worst at all times.
So I have to kind of say no, not being realistic about this.
I've not noticed that about you.
That's that's news to me.
OK, I'm going to end it with this final question.
It's commonplace now amongst maybe the science based lifting world.
And I've said this myself that someone who's enhanced is best off training the same way as someone
who's not enhanced as a natural lifter.
Now I've stepped back from saying that because I'm not so convinced that's entirely true.
But do you have AI know there's been a lot of speculation today, so I don't know if you have a
definitive sort of standpoint on that bit.
Where would you land at this point in time?
I think the only honest way to answer that question for me right now is to say if I were to start
using TRT, how would I train my change my training program?
That's the only honest way I can answer that question, because honestly, I don't really have another
way of approaching that that would be reasonably.
You know, it's kind of interesting.
Your question you posed yourself was how would I not?
Would I?
It sounds like you would.
There'd be some changes, albeit maybe minor, that you would make.
Right now, based on what I know from what we've talked about today, I would drop back from training
three times a week, training 2 * a week.
I would simply reduce the number of exposures that I experienced.
That's all I would do.
I reduced the number of exposures and I would be a little bit more mindful in, I mean, I already am
pretty mindful at my age of what I do.
I don't do anything that I think is going to cause anything to get ripped off.
You know, I tend to stick with, I tend to stick with exercises that I'm fairly confident won't cause
too much of an issue.
So I don't think I would need to change my exercise selection too much.
I think I'm pretty sort of as safe as I can get on that front already.
So I literally I would just switch from doing three times a week to two times a week and I would
pretty much keep everything else the same.
So honestly, that would be the only thing I did.
I would reduce my exposures.
Yeah, it's interesting.
And one thing I've noticed since we've been having this conversation, not just today, but over the
last few months or whatever, is a lot of the people that I see who are huge advocates of twice a
week training and, and sort of, you know, have maybe said, hey, you know, I've tried three times a
week.
My joints felt bad, didn't like it, etcetera.
They tend to be people who are on TRT or on on gear.
And I do wonder if even if they don't cognitively know that maybe that's eventually why they're
having some of these issues.
I do wonder if that's why that narrative is pushed a little bit more heavily is, yeah, you know,
you're probably actually going to respond slightly better or feel a little bit better with that
slightly reduced frequency.
Yeah, the word response is difficult in that context, isn't it?
It's like that's holistic response rather than like a musc because muscularly is going to still
follow the same rules.
Until you get injured and then that's that's like.
Until.
You get injured?
Yeah, of course.
That's the worst.
But yeah, that's the issue, isn't it?
It's like holistically response is is kind of correctly described there.
But from a muscle point of view, it's still going to follow the same rules.
And three times a week, it's still better than two times a week.
But yeah, my answer would be I would reduce my exposure, but I wouldn't change volumes.
I wouldn't change anything else really like that.
I would probably try and be a little bit more careful.
But again, that's the only honest way I can answer that question.
I don't think it's something that I'm capable of really saying.
I would deliberately go about programming because I don't think I have enough knowledge to to make
that assessment for somebody else or on a on a generic basis.
OK, there we go.
That was our first Anabolics podcast.
I don't know if we'll revisit this, if there's more information out there, if people give us some
feedback and maybe they'll point us some direction to answer some of the questions that we've posed
today.
But if there is anything like that, then please let us know.
Message us, message Chris, comment in my question box or something like that.
And yeah, like you said, apologies that we didn't give you guys a working model, but hopefully it
was an interesting conversation and got you guys thinking, you know, if anyone who is enhanced or
worked with enhanced athletes, maybe just a conversation, start to think about how some of these
things do affect you or your athletes.
Hopefully you'll join us again next week.
And thank you, as always, for listening and sharing and subscribing and spreading the podcast.