Episode: 015 Training Frequency - Why 3x per week beats 2x even if MYOPS is still elevated
URL: https://open.spotify.com/episode/4QrIICSCbF1mlnJt3Cukpx
Published: 2025-09-01
================================================================================

Good morning, good evening, good afternoon to you, everyone, wherever you are.
Welcome back to another episode.
And as we discussed last episode, we haven't been doing a very good job at doing the, you know,
small talk.
And you're shaking your head at me.
I was going to going to get you put in a spot to tell us a story, but I won't do that.
We're going to skip to the good stuff.
But Chris, how are you today?
I'm doing well, Thanks, Jake.
Yes, it's my evening.
Your morning?
I think so, yeah.
Good evenings and good mornings all around.
Indeed, indeed.
So let's jump into it.
We're not going to explain it to us trying to do any of the small talk.
So I'm going to kick us off.
We have a plan from someone we've not talked about before, and this is a guy named C Klein.
Now I want to tell you a little bit about C Klein because A, we haven't talked about him and he's
not someone who comes up a whole lot because he kind of fit in this sort of bridging sort of time
between the drone Zero and the silver era.
So and part of why he's not discussed a whole, I mean, he's discussed a lot in like the historical
sense, but you guys may not have heard him discussed because he didn't technically win any Mr.
Americas, only Mr. Universe, any of these competitions because they simply weren't happening when he
was he was competing.
He did compete in some competitions.
He'd win some competitions, but they weren't like those big sanctioned events weren't happening at
this point in time.
So we're talking these early 1940s, even late 1920s.
And he did, you know, for example, Sig was voted the what was the most most muscular man in America
or or world's best man in America?
I think he he I think he actually was given both of those titles at different times.
And he is an interesting character in that he has like a a significant lineage.
He was actually married to the daughter of Eugene Sandow's mentor, so a guy named professor to her.
So quite a significant figure in this sort of early, late drones period and early silver era.
Now the workout plan we're going to discuss today, he he actually did publish quite a few different
plans and and we might discuss some other ones in the future, but this was a beginner plan.
And what I think is particularly interesting about this plan is it was it was for beginners, but it
actually followed an AB full body structure.
Now at this point in time and even well into the silver era, what you almost exclusively saw would
be the same workout routine repeated multiple times a week.
So to see this kind of like like two different workout structures that you're alternating or that
you're performing at different times is quite an interesting format.
And you know, there were some people who did stuff like this, but it was certainly the exception.
So we've got 2 workouts and they were each performed.
So every exercise performed was done with single set.
So this is obviously, you know, we're talking quite early on when the set system wasn't that popular
yet.
And I think we had discussed this in the past, but the the first sort of integration of the set
system was actually repeating an exercise at a later point in the workout.
So, and I think Sig does talk about this where he would say, hey, let's say your biceps were an
emphasis of yours, a priority.
What you might is say you're doing a a dumbbell curl, you might do the dumbbell curl at the start of
the workout and then you might do it again once more later in the workout.
So that was kind of the way that they were, you know, sometimes prioritizing or specializing in
muscles and, and sort of introducing this early integration of a set system, but this foundation
workout just use single sets.
And because it was for beginners, he instructed people to start with a weight that he could do about
12:00-ish repetitions with work up to about 15.
And then you actually encourage people to work back down and, and drop down to 8 repetitions up the
load.
And you know, you sort of repeat with this sort of eight repetition range.
And in some of these other work, he does actually talk about dropping down to 5.
So it does seem for the more experienced lifters, he did prefer these low to moderate Rep range.
So workout one again, everything was one set 12 to 15.
To begin with.
He started with sit ups on an abdominal board.
So these were like decline setups.
Then he went to A2 arm curl.
So dumbbell curl into a calf raise into a pullover with a barbell, which was obviously a very
popular exercise throughout both the bronze and silver era.
He then went into a leg raise, like a hanging leg raise into well, it may have been performed on an
incline bench, essentially a variant of the lead graze to A to like a barbell bench, which obviously
they weren't calling it a bench press at this point in time, but that's what it was into a side bend
into a deep knee bend.
So a squat, which is they used to call that a deep knee bend and then back into a bench.
But he did this with dumbbells.
And again, they, they called it something different at this point in time, but it was essentially
just a dumbbell chest press.
So that was our, our workout a or workout one.
And then I know there's a lot to remember here, but I'm just going to jump into workout two.
We had a deadlift into sit ups into reverse curls into the leg raise again.
So we've got that repeated into a barbell shrug.
So vertical shrug into what was called crisscross in a standing position.
Now, I was unable to find an image of this, unfortunately.
I I imagine I mean with this would have been done with dumbbells.
I'm interested actually.
How would you interpret that crisscross standing with dumbbells?
It sounds like it might be a slightly more complicated version of a lot to raise.
Yeah, I was thinking maybe like in the ground the world type Yeah, which were popular exercises back
then, but I couldn't find any other references to it being called this.
And again, this is part of the issue being in the bronze coming out of drones ear eyes.
There were some pretty funky exercises.
It didn't actually persist into the silver ear and this may have been one of those.
And then he went into a dumbbell bench again and said this again, it was called a push away, but it
was a dumbbell chest press into the dumbbell curl.
And then he actually used weighted boots and did a leg curl and a leg extension.
And they concluded with a bit of like a dumbbell complex, like a, you know, multiple exercises in
one, like a little almost conditioning type thing.
So that were the two workouts.
Apart from your confusion over that crisscross standing exercise, what are your thoughts?
So I've got a few thoughts here.
I mean, I think maybe you've found the routine with the least amount of back work in it.
I think this is like a quest of yours to find routines that aggravate me because they don't have any
lap work because I've got, I mean, there's no, there's no frontal plane in a wide grip pull downs or
pull ups.
There's no there isn't even any sagittal plane stuff apart from the pullover.
So the pullover would have been obviously done with the peak effort quite a long way overhead.
So that would have been very much more PEC and triceps long head than it would have been that work.
So really apart from the deadlift and the shrug, there's not really any back work going on here,
which is absolutely crazy to me.
Other stuff, really, I'm very surprised given how close sig line was to the sort of preceding
generation, the bronze era stuff, very surprised to see a lack of overhead pressing.
You know, a lot of emphasis on on bench pressing, very, very little overhead pressing.
So you kind of wonder whether he had some kind of disagreement with that particular exercise because
it really seems very strange to go from a lot of overhead pressing with what we initially started
with all the way back at the beginning.
I think we looked at sundials routines and now we're seeing almost pretty much none unless there's
something in that dumbbell drill.
So that really jumped out at me.
Again, when we talked about some of the really early routines, we noticed a lack of deadlift,
deadlift variations, which seems strange because you would think they'll be very easy to implement
and we've got one here.
So again, that's another deviation from the trends that we were sort of observing in terms of things
that make sense.
It's interesting that we've got both curls and reverse curls because obviously that gives us some
radialis as well as, and I'm intrigued to see the leg raisers because you know, for the range of
motion that he would probably have worked in.
That's definitely a rec firm exercise.
So this really is that kind of inventiveness or creativity that I was, I have not been seeing and
was kind of expecting to see eventually where people would notice that if you did knee extensions
and you know, kind of leg raisers, you would get some rectus from Morris Development that you
weren't getting from from the squat patterns.
So it's really interesting to see that, especially this early surprising therefore that it wasn't
continued because this is a clear example of somebody doing something that would have made a
difference and you would have expected it to have been picked up, but it hasn't.
Well, from what I've seen you show us so far, I've not seen that that happening.
Interesting you all said, the late tone, the late extension is such an early time as well.
Obviously these were using iron boots, so a little bit different to what we would conventionally do
today, but in essence, you know, training the same muscles and to have the leg ascension alongside
the leg raise, you know, interesting.
He's got two things, hitting the direct FEM when a lot of the other programs you see have no direct
FEM work.
Absolutely.
But of course, what we understand about two joint muscles is that they definitely do tend to have
two distinctive regions, sort of the upper or proximal region and the distal or lower region.
And the distal region tends to be, in this case, the rec fan more on the extension focused on the
proximal region.
The upper region tends to be more hip flexion focused.
So you know, it, it's entirely plausible given that he was working in an environment where, you
know, the only stimulus for hypertrophy would have been his workouts.
He's not confounded by the pharmaceuticals that confound issues today that he may have noticed these
changes happening and therefore included those exercises.
I find it interesting as well that he in the first workout he actually concluded with a squat and so
the early exercises you know, bicep curls, car phrase pullovers like generally these not as
cardiovascular many exercises and yet in the second second workout actually starts with a deadlift.
Yeah, that's a really interesting difference, isn't it?
So yeah, you've got that push, everything that's cardiovascularly demanding at the end of the
workout mentality, which, you know, other people have made that point, you know, even more recently,
which makes a lot of sense because if you've got a lot of muscle mass and you're doing sort of
higher repetitions because of course, remember that squat racks today are very convenient.
What they were dealing with back then was much less, you know, reliable, if it existed at all.
So, you know, you can kind of understand why they had to do high reps on the squat because you just
can't get that bar into the position if you want to, you know, kind of use heavier stuff.
So it makes sense if you're doing high Rep squats, you're going to put them at the end of the
worker.
Maybe that explains the deadlift issue because they wouldn't have had that problem.
So you could have actually pushed the weight up a little bit more.
You can obviously you're not prevented from taking short breaks between reps either.
So, you know, maybe that's exactly maybe maybe the explanation is right there, which is simply that
when you're doing squats as they would have done them with a Barber in place with, you know, kind of
the need to do higher reps because you can't rack it very easily.
It's going to be very, very cardiovascularly demanding.
In the case of the deadlift, you can load it up to whatever you want and you can do a Rep and you
can cluster it really or kind of at least leave a intra intraset pause between reps or inter Rep.
Yeah, potentially, yeah.
Like if he's suggesting later on to go down to five repetitions where you that's not really going to
be feasible with a squat.
So yeah.
Absolutely not in that, in that, in that, in that sort of situations with the equipment that they've
got, whereas the deadlift is like whatever you want it to be.
Yeah, that's a good point.
I do think it's important whenever we look at these plants, always be thinking, what did they have
access to, what didn't they have access to that we have access to today?
Did that potentially influence anything?
Because we do see that with this squat all the time.
The squats, 20 grams squats, all this kind of thing.
It's like, yeah, but how else could they have done it?
They didn't have other options a lot of the time.
And I think especially when you pair that with the lack of detail that they had a tendency to work
with, they really left details out and they kind of assumed a lot.
And if you pair that we could be looking at this going, well, we think this means this.
And actually with the amount of detail they left out, with the assumptions that they were bringing
to the table, the actual picture might have been somewhat different from what, you know, we would
expect.
I think we have a very programmatic of approach to these things.
They probably saw a lot of our, the things that we see as program variables that can't be fiddled
with.
They probably saw them more as more kind of guidelines for a fixed program rules.
There's so much fluidity whenever I'm reading any of these old magazines or books.
I mean like so often I'll get to a plan and they'll be like this exercise, do you know, 2 sets of 15
and this one do 2 or 10 to 15 and then there'll be an exercise and there's nothing that's like.
Just do.
It yeah, just do it literally it'll be like just do it till you can't do anymore, OK.
3 1/2 hours later, yeah.
Anyway, OK, so we are doing another one of our Part 2 episodes.
I think we did this last week, a few weeks ago where we were doing like a second, second episode and
a top would be done previously, maybe last week.
And this is in some ways another Part 2.
So do you want to introduce us to what we're going to discuss?
Yeah.
So we've been talking a lot about training frequency.
And so one of the questions that we've been seeing a lot recently relating to training frequency and
actually one of the claims that some critics have been making about higher frequency.
When I say higher, I mean sort of three days a week or every other day type training.
One of the and one of the critics that's been or criticisms that's been made about this is this idea
of myofibrilla protein synthesis rates being elevated post workout.
And potentially then if the rates are still elevated in the next workout, that then could cause a
problem for us getting the maximum stimulus from the subsequent workout.
So that's that's basically what we want to address today.
So essentially to give some very brief physiological background just so that we're all on the same
page.
What's happening is we go into the gym, we do a workout, train a muscle and then that muscle is all
the fibers in that muscle are stimulated by the mechanical tension that they experience or produce
and experience.
And that then signals them to up regulate, increase the rates at which myofibrils are all
myofibrillar proteins are being synthesized or made.
So what we're saying is that all of the time muscle fibers are producing building new minor fibula
proteins and having experienced a mechanical tension stimulus, the rate at which those proteins are
being built is increased.
And I'm just being really specific here because sometimes people think that muscle fibers are not
building proteins all the time and that suddenly when you do a workout, they start building those
and it doesn't work like that.
You have a basal rate at which the proteins are being built and then when you do the workout, any
muscle fibers that have been stimulated will experience an increase in the rate at which those
proteins are being built.
Now there's a slight extra complication in the sense that you can have, or we do have a rate at
which proteins are being broken down South.
At any one moment in time, you've got either a myofibrilla protein synthesis rate or a muscle
protein synthesis rate.
And we'll talk about the differences between those two things later on.
And you also have a myofibrilla or muscle protein breakdown rate.
So you kind of, if you look in a lot of scenarios, you'll see an MPs muscle protein synthesis and an
MPB muscle protein breakdown.
And ultimately, whether or not the fiber increases in size depends on the balance between those two
rates.
So you can have a situation where the protein synthesis rate is high, but your protein breakdown
rate is also high and you end up basically at 0 still.
And so you've got to be aware that just looking at muscle protein synthesis rates or my from the
protein synthesis rate isn't going to give you a perfect picture.
But generally speaking, we do tend to focus on myofibular protein synthesis rate or muscle protein
synthesis rate to a greater extent.
So that's the background that we've got in terms of we've done a workout, we've stimulated muscle
fibers to grow and they're doing that by upregulating, increasing the rate at which they're building
these new myofibular proteins.
And you know hopefully that is done successful in terms of hypertrophy across the week.
Now in a previous episode we've talked about what the stimulus period is, which is essentially this
period of time in which we are in this net hypertrophy state.
Now the stimulus period doesn't have to equal the duration of time for which my fibula proteins
interest rates are elevated because you can have a scenario whereby the repair processes are pulling
all of that net muscle growth as it would be into the places where it needs to go to rebuild
proteins that have been previously removed.
So you can have a scenario where the fibre isn't actually growing, but you're essentially repairing
damage that you've just created, you know, throughout the post workout period process.
So what we're going to talk about today then is the idea that when we have stimulated an increase in
myofibular protein synthesis or muscle protein synthesis post workout, that stimulus then will
continue for a certain period of time.
Now we don't have amazing amounts of data for exactly how long that period lasts.
The Hypertroid literature has a couple of different measurement methods and originally we had what
are essentially measurements around a point in in time.
They took measurements over a period of a couple of hours and you kind of get what I would call a
point measurement.
It's not a real point measurement, but it's kind of centered around a point.
More recently, most of the hypertrophy research has gone down the route of looking at daily protein
synthesis rates where you don't actually know what's happening at anyone point during the day, but
you do know what's happened over the entire 24 or 48 hour period.
You're in studies which take those 24 or 48 hour period of measurements are really bad for actually
knowing whether rates are still elevated at any given point in time.
Because if you take a measurement to 24 hours and another measurement at 48 and that's encompassed
the previous 24 hours, you don't actually know whether rates were still elevated at the end point of
that 24 hour period.
You just know that the net effect over the 24 hour period you're in has been, you know, sort of
above baseline levels.
So really when we look at what I call point measurements, which is as I say are not real point, but
they're just kind of a couple of hours around a point in time, they only really go out to about 3032
hours there or thereabouts.
So we don't really have any data for myofibular protein synthesis rates and I don't think we've got
much data for muscle protein synthesis rates either past that kind of time point, so.
That's really important because I think people might not realize that.
So essentially, like let's say you were to 9 till 5 and then someone said, OK, on this day you made
$200.
It's like, OK, great.
But did you make 124th of that at 11:00 PM?
Or did you make $0.00 at 11:00 PM and you made all of it by 5:00 PM?
And what you're saying is most research on this is just telling us what's the daily total.
We don't know if it's stopped at 5:00 PM.
Anything past about 30 hours or so, if you see a study that says, you know, we're measuring myops at
48 hours post worker, just look at it and it'll probably say that it's where it will say that it's
integrated myops.
And what that means is that they've got a understanding of what the entire area under the curve was
between the 24 hour mark and the 48 hour mark.
Between the 0 mark and the 24 hour mark, they're not telling you what the rates were at 48 hours.
They're telling you that there was a overall effect area under the curve or average rate if you want
to express it in that way.
That was, you know, above baseline levels in that 48 hour window.
But you're absolutely right, it could have been that, you know, the 1st 12 hours of your second day
was where it all happened.
And after that, you know, 36 hour point, you're back down at 0, back down.
Not true zero at baseline levels as again, it's reiterating that we're always making those proteins.
But you know, when I say zero, I just mean we're back down to baseline and normal levels that you
know you would experience in there.
Muscle fiber that hadn't just been through a workout situation.
So yeah, we're limited in terms of what data is available, but you know that's kind of part of part
of the process.
You just have to make do with what you've got.
So coming, that's all kind of background.
So coming back to the question, you know, the question that we're wrestling with today is if we do a
workout and we stimulate an increase in myofibular protein synthesis rates and that stimulus has
caused all the damage it could be either.
And that has caused us to be still observing an elevation in myofibular protein synthesis rates at
the point when we do the next workout.
What is the implication of that?
So let me just talk that through again because I think I probably didn't do a very good job.
So we do a workout and we stimulate, or again, I'm getting myself wrapped up because I want to be
clear that I'm not differentiating here between my OPS rates that are elevated due to stimulus and
my OPS rates that are elevated due to damage.
You do a workout, you produce both the stimulus fibrogery and you also produce some damage.
Then you come back and look at it 48 hours later when you're about to do your second workout.
And you can see, because we're in a thought experiment here, you can see that you've still got
elevated mild.
Now you don't know whether that's due to a stimulus, whether it's due to damage, OK, what's the
implication of that?
Or the implication of that is that there's going to be some restriction on your ability to benefit
from your muscle protein synthesis rate elevations in that second workout.
Now why is that?
It's because we have cellular machinery that synthesizers proteins that can only synthesize at a
certain rate can.
Imagine you've got a factory that's capable of pumping out units at a certain rate number per hour,
and you can't go above that rate.
You're limited physically by the machinery that you've got access to.
Essentially, imagine that you could do a workout that would push you up to 100% of your capacity to
make proteins, and then of course it would then come down again.
And let's say when you got to the next workout that you were still at 10%.
What you're now saying is that you've only got 90% to play with in your next workout.
So your next workout is going to be 10% less effective because you've still got 10% doing things.
And it could be stimulus processing or it could be damaged.
And I'm not arguing either of those things right now.
So it could be either, doesn't matter.
The point is that you're using it from the previous workout to do certain things that need to be
done, and therefore you've only got 90% to play with in that next workout.
You're going to find that your stimulus in the next workout is approximately 10% less effective.
Is that making sense?
Yes, yes, I think that's fairly clear.
I do have one question.
I don't know if you want to answer it now or later in that thought experiment.
We are assuming that that first workout did in fact Max out that sort of peak of my OPS.
Now are there ways that someone can stimulate my OPS and not Max it out?
And so let's let's say you only had an 80% elevation and then you saw the 10% elevation.
When you go and do it again, does that now, if you don't do another 80%, does it now go up to 90% or
you're still tapping it out at 80%?
Does that question make sense?
That's a very, very, very good question because ultimately that is going to be a key point that we
have to return to when we talk about the practical implications of this.
Because ultimately the reason I talk about a maximum level is because in order to understand what
you are losing, you have to have a maximum to express it relative to.
So you, your machinery can make this, this rate.
And that's your 100% rate.
You can now say, well, I've lost 10% of that rate.
If you only did say a 50% a workout that only bumped miles up to 50% of your maximum, then of course
when you come back down to your next workout, you've got 10% of your maximum that is still, you
know, kind of being used for other things.
You've got to be able to express that 10% against your hundred.
You can't express the 10% against your 50%, otherwise you'd think it was 20%.
You know, you have to have an understanding of what your maximum levels are.
And you're absolutely right, because it entirely possible that you could, you know, add your 50%
onto your 10% and you'd now be at 60%.
And actually what's happened there is that because your workout wasn't anywhere near your 100%
limit, you're perfectly capable of operating within the structures that you're in.
And you don't need to worry about that hangover, if you like, from the previous workout.
So essentially, you're absolutely right.
We've got to look at things in practical context and go, did my workout or does my workout actually
hit 100% of my capabilities or am I substantially below that?
You did make a point that muscle damage is wrapped up in that.
And yes, again, I don't know if you're going to talk about that more a little bit later on, but it
is just an interesting thing to keep in perspective when someone is programming to understand that
actually if I'm programming in a way that that minimizes or does cause more muscle damage, that is
all actually wrapped up in the same machinery that's causing hypertrophy.
Yeah.
So if you create a lot of muscle damage, then what's going to happen is not only are you going to
have fatigue mechanisms that are creating problems for you in terms of stimulus, you've got that
muscle damage.
It's going to create a reduction in the force producing capacity of the fibers, reduce the tension,
reduce the stimulus.
You've also again got the inflammation that reduces the voting increment through the superspinal CNS
fatigue effect.
What you're dealing with then is a suppressive effect just from the fatigue mechanisms of your
stimulus.
But we don't often.
Then talk additionally about the point that you just raised, which is that if I'm still processing,
you know, proteins and I'm still building proteins for the purpose of repair, nothing to do with
hypertrophy stimulus at this point I'm just dealing with, you know, in and out.
So I've got breakdown equaling my synthesis, breakdown equal synthesis because I'm still actually
having to make those proteins.
Yeah.
So even though my breakdown is meaning that I'm not net, you know, kind of in protein accretion, I'm
actually in net zero, I'm still actually having to use my machinery to build those proteins that are
basically just an in and out.
Now essentially that means that if I do produce a lot of muscle damage, I've got to then build that
into my subsequent workouts of the program and expect that my stimulus could potentially be impacted
by those as well.
So if I'm doing, you know, workouts that are quite a long way apart but very, very damaging, that
could be an issue.
So really all I would like to do today is to discuss two sources of information or two studies that
we could use to try and put some numbers, very rough numbers on to the magnitude of this effect.
The reason I want to do that is very simply because when I look online, I see people saying that if
Myops rates are elevated from a previous workout, then the hypertrophy stimulus is impaired.
OK, Nobody's really disagreeing with that.
What we're disagreeing with is what's the magnitude of the effect?
So you might find somebody who says, oh, well, actually, if myops rates are even slightly elevated,
then you don't get any stimulus from your next workout.
Well, clearly that's just silly.
That's not happening, you know, Whereas, you know, somebody else might say, well actually, and maybe
the effect is very tiny.
Well, let's look at it and see what data we've actually got.
Because, you know, especially at the moment, some people have been claiming that there isn't any
data that would give us any insight into this whatsoever.
And there's actually two really nice studies that we can use to give us some insights now.
Yes, little bit of extrapolation, but not as much as you might think.
So essentially, there's no real good order to talk about these two studies.
Both of them have disadvantages and advantages, and actually they mirror each other in terms of
where one has an advantage, the other has a has a disadvantage, and vice versa.
So let's just start with one of my favorite studies, which is the review paper by Philippe Demas
which covers muscle protein synthesis.
Now straight away you can see that the disadvantages that we are looking at data concerning muscle
protein synthesis rates and not myofibrilla protein synthesis rates.
Now some people might immediately say, let's throw that out in the window and just not talk about
it.
Let's work through it because what you're going to see is that when we look at the next source of
data which does cover myofibrilla proteins and this is regulations is not actually that different.
So you end up in a more or less the same place.
And I find that very reassuring.
Basically, you can look in the review paper that Philippe Demas has done.
What you can see is that immediately post workout muscle protein synthesis rates jump up a very,
very large amount.
Now they then come flying back down again and about 12 hours, they're much, much closer to baseline
than they were in that first kind of 12 hour odd sort of 6 to 8 hour period at the beginning.
So you've got this huge spike in muscle protein centers rates that come, you know, all the way back
down.
And just to put the numbers to it, if you start out by saying that you kind of you're at 0%
baseline, which is clearly not the case because we've got a baseline level of that level.
You then jump up to about, you know, 160% of that in that first, you know, kind of 6 to 8 hours.
And then by the kind of 12 hour point, you're down around 40% again or you know, above baseline.
So you can see that you've got this enormous spike happening in the first, you know, kind of 6 to 10
hours or 6 to 8 hours post worker.
Now I believe, and I've argued this in other places, that that's where a lot of the hypertrophy is
actually happening.
Now, if you look at these studies that Philippe included in his review, they're all using quite a
lot of volume.
They're using between 6:00 and 12:00 sets per muscle group per workout to get these rates to
increase.
Now, I would regard that as a maximal rate.
So I really like this review paper for that reason, because you can see that essentially you're kind
of capping out the stimulus you're capable of achieving.
So when we hit that number of 160%, that's probably your machinery capping out.
Really, you know, most likely that's probably as much as we can push it.
And then of course it comes all the way back down again and it comes down to about 40%.
And then it kind of just gradually tinkers down to about sort of 20% by, you know kind of 25% ish by
about 24 hours.
And then by about sort of 36, it's down around about the sort of 10% mark.
Really what you can do is you can look at this and you can say, well, if 160% is my maximum rate and
again, we're dealing with MPs here, not my OPS.
But if 160% is my maximum rate, if I'm looking to do another workout at 48 hours and I'm down at say
you know, kind of 15 or so percent, then realistically you're kind of saying you what about a 10%
problem?
You've still got an elevation of MPs above baseline, which is about 10% and that's that or 10 to
15%, sorry.
And of your 160, that's around about 10% ish. 15% is about, yeah, kind of 10% to 160.
So the, the problem would be that you would only be able to, if you want to then stimulate another
maximum amount of muscle protein synthesis, which I don't think you'd be able to do with 6 to 12
sets because I think you'd still be experiencing quite a lot of fatigue.
But if you were able to do that, you would probably only lose 10% of your 160.
You'd be at 150 instead of 160.
Sorry, no, that's, I'm mixing my percentages.
Sorry, I'm not mixing my percentage.
You'd be at 145% because it would be 15%, not 10%.
So you'd be, you'd be at, yeah, you'd be 145%.
You'd essentially have 90% of your 100% stimulus, again, throwing percentages around, but that's
where you would be at.
You'd be at 90% of what your maximum capabilities would be, assuming the curve was exactly the same
shape in both situations, which it may not be, but let's assume that it would be.
So essentially we're seeing that we're losing 10%.
Is all of that making sense?
Yes, yes.
Hope hopefully we didn't lose any one of those percentages.
It's just confusing because we're talking about 160% as opposed to 100% being the maximum.
So ultimately you're just saying there's about a 10% reduction.
If one were able to train again at that period of time and fatigue wasn't an issue in this example,
obviously it would have been.
But you're saying obviously it doesn't attenuate the full potential for that hypertrophy stimulus.
It doesn't, you know, we're, we're talking a relatively small amount here that would actually be
lost.
Exactly.
And we can then look at a single that was a review paper that covered a number of different data
sources.
We can then look at the single study by bird, which is very famous, which is the one set versus
three sets comparison.
Now if we look at the one set, we don't have a problem because Myops is backed down a baseline by
about 3536 hours.
If we look at three sets, we can extrapolate the line just as a linear extrapolation and it it goes
down to 0 around about 60 hours.
So implies you've kind of got about 12 hours of problem in your subsequent workout post workout
period if you're training every 48 hours or three times a week, so you've got this 12 hour period.
And if we look at the rates, the baseline rate is .03, The peak rate at three sets is around about
.08 give or take.
So you kind of got .05 of difference and at the 48 hour mark you're down to .04.
So essentially 20% of your three set stimulus Max is being chewed up by your previous workout.
This comes back to your original point, which is that if we went and did another workout at that 48
hour mark, would we go up to .08, which is the previous three SET Max?
Or because that three sets is almost certainly not our true maximum because you can carry on pushing
that higher with, you know, kind of 3456 sets or whatever, You know, would we just simply have a
High Peak because you're clearly capable of doing that.
So it's unknown.
And I think that's the why we see a 20% difference here and we saw a 10% difference with the Demas
extrapolation because ultimately here we're dealing with a much lower peak because three sets
instead of 6 to 12 sets.
But fundamentally 10 to 20% is the kind of ballpark data that we're dealing with.
You're losing about 10 to 20% or 15 to 20% there or thereabouts off your, you know, subsequent
workout stimulus, assuming that those kind of muscle protein synthesis rates or my for protein
synthesis rates are still present, are still being elevated from the previous workout.
Now is that all?
Is that all making sense what I've just described?
Yeah, and in this example.
That's worst case scenario because like you said, there's it's possible that obviously that P could
be higher, that we could just increase to higher than what we actually stimulated in the first
workout.
So worst case scenario here we're talking a loss of 10 to 20% of that initial stimulus.
But it, it may actually not even be that.
It may not be.
That for two reasons.
Firstly, it may not be that, because as you say, we could probably push this initial SIKE higher if
we were only doing three sets, which is the maximum you're ever going to do in a high frequency
program anyway.
Secondly, it only applies for the 1st 12.
In the case of the bird extrapolation, it only applies probably for the 1st 12 hours of your
subsequent 48 hour window.
So it's only applying for 1/4 of your subsequent stimulus period.
So it's probably 4 times smaller than you think it's going to be.
Eyeballing the percentages, I think you know, working with a 10% or a 15% is 10% probably is number
I would bet on.
You know, 20% I think is way over the top, absolutely way over the top.
But if you wanted to, you could go to a like model like mine, like the weekly net stimulus model and
you could say, well, OK, I'm going to discount all of the higher frequency stuff either the three
sets, three sets, three times.
We call, you know, bear in mind you won't have this problem with single set programs.
You can't do this with a single set program.
If you've got a single set program, you're not going to have this problem because you're going to be
back at baseline anyway.
You can see that from the bird study.
So if you're doing one set three times a week or once every other day, you are absolutely not going
to have to do this correction if you want to do a correction for say, three sets, because you can
see from the bird that you've got that little problem.
You could say, well, I'm going to discount my workouts by 10%.
You can absolutely do that.
And that will be based on the explanation we've done here.
If you're discounting them by 20%, you're probably somebody who's trying to make a point other than
somebody who's, you know, trying to track this through logically.
But you know, you could do that.
If you do that, you're going to find that three sets is still better than two sets.
Sorry, three times a week is still better than two times a week in any recoverable volume
combinations you want to use.
So if you look at the standard kind of comparisons of three sets three times a week and you compare
that with five sets twice a week, the weekly estimates model gives you a difference that's bigger
than that 20% that you've just carved off the top because you think that microblog proteins in this
rates might not be back down at 0.
Does that make sense?
So there is a bigger difference between 3 times a week and two times a week with Max volumes than
there is by this very tiny correction.
I actually really like this.
The reason I really like this is because every time I look at the weekly that's stimulus model, I
think that three times a week outperforms 2 * a week by more than it should.
And I look at it, I go, why is that happening?
Why might that be the case?
And I go through all my assumptions like, well, they're all airtight.
There's nothing I can do.
This is the first time I've actually seen something that might help me move three times a week.
Just take it down a little bit because it looks like even for somebody who is a fan of this kind of
way of training, I look at it and go, that's just too much better than, you know, twice a week for
my comfort.
So I'm really, I really like the fact that this, this starts to just take the edge off 3 times a
week and make it look a little bit more reasonable.
I'm actually wondering whether it would be feasible to introduce a term into the weekly stimulus
model to just shave 10% off.
Or you can give people the option, hey, do you want to shave, you know, 10 percent, 15 percent, 20%
off.
I think if you're, if you're shaving more than 20% off, you're clearly not looking at the literature
and you're clearly making a point that you think, you know, that two times is better than three
times without really having any data to support that.
But, you know, I think within that 10 to 20% range, there's clearly data here that would allow you
to, you know, take a little bit of the benefit of a higher frequency off and and move it closer to a
a slightly lower frequency.
Still doesn't change anything.
Everything stays the same.
You still end up with three times a week being better than two times.
It's just not quite so horrendously superior as it was before the correction, and that's again,
obviously.
Assuming multi sets.
If you're doing single sets like you said, you can't do it for single.
Sets because because we can see from the bird study that single sets comes back down to baseline at
36 hours.
So you can't argue that there's any elevation of myofibular protein synthesis that would cause you a
problem at 36 or 48 hours in the case of doing single set programs.
So for people who want to do single sets, you don't need to think about this.
This is totally and utterly irrelevant.
I would argue probably 2 sets probably comes down to, you know, if you split the difference between
36 and 60 hours, you can probably argue that two sets is coming down at around 48 even just
literally on the bird numbers, not on anything else.
I mean, I look at the fatigue data and I see three sets coming down to baseline at 48 hours.
Anyways, honestly, I think that you kind of this is an extremely kind of what's the right word
picking kind of thing to do to sort of because ultimately we've got other data suggesting that it
may not matter and that the rates probably are down to baseline by 48.
But extrapolating literally just based on the bird study and saying, you know, OK, we've got maybe
sort of 1020% elevation still present.
What does that really mean in practice?
Well, yeah, you can just give the three times a week a haircut and and and take it down a little
notch.
It's not going to change anything in terms of comparisons between two times and three times, because
the difference is too big anyway, in case anyone's not.
Aware you have a weak and that's similar model calculator.
There might be some people listening to this who don't realize that you can in fact go and play with
these numbers yourself, right.
So these are, yeah, absolutely.
And.
If and if you want to do a correction to them, you can just, if you're using three sets three times
a week or three sets every other day, that's the only scenario where you would do this.
The only scenario you would do is you can just choose to look at your, your arbitrary units value.
So let's say you go to the weekly units to me as calculator, which as Jake was just saying, click
the link in my bio and you can go straight there.
There's a calculator button.
You can just press that and it'll pop a calculator up in front of you.
So you can then just put in you're doing three times a week and if you're doing one or two sets
three times a week, you just don't have to do a correction.
If you want to do a correction for this excess myofibular proteins and this rate of evasions at the
next worker, you just take 10 or 15 or 20% off the number and then you can compare that corrected
number with any, you know, kind of other program.
You might be doing 2 * a week, five sets, four sets, three sets, whatever.
It's not going to change anything.
You're still going to end up showing that the three set program is better.
Keep saying three sets.
It's because I'm thinking about the bird study being three sets versus one set.
Three times a week is still going to come out as better than, you know, once or twice a week.
It's just too much better to make a difference.
This 10 to 20%, which is, you know, the number that we can kind of get to in terms of, you know,
myofibular protein synthesis rates may be still elevated very slightly the next workout.
It's really not going to change anything.
But yeah, they can use the calculator.
And then if they want to, if they've done a three set protocol either three times a week or every
other day, you could apply this correction of 10/15/20 percent and get a slightly more, you know,
kind of maybe accurate number.
I don't know.
I mean ultimately looking at the DEMAS paper, it's not clear whether or not you would still have
elevated MPs at kind of 48 hours.
It's it requires you to really extrapolate quite aggressively.
The bird does allow you to extrapolate relatively simply just a straight line comes down to 60 hours
with the three set protocol.
But bear in mind, the bird we're doing 14 Rep maxes more or less Now, I think if you were to do an 8
Rep Max or even heavier, I don't think you would still have any muscle damage kicking around at, you
know, 48 plus hours.
So again, the validity of doing this correction is, is questionable.
I'm being extraordinarily generous to make the point, like I was making the point with the frequency
studies.
You know, I think a lot of people messaged me saying they really appreciated the fact that when I
did the frequency analysis that I did recently and I used the evidence that the people who are
criticizing me were using, I said, I'm starting from that point.
Therefore let's talk about that and let's go from where they are to where I am and explain the
differences along the way.
But what I'm trying to do here is do the same thing.
You know, people are saying that they're main issue with higher frequency is that they don't think
my OPS rates have come back down to baseline by the time they do the next workout.
I'm like, well, let's look at the data that allows you to assess that and see how big the problem
is.
And the problem is probably around 10%, my best guess, I think 20% of you being extraordinarily
uncharitable, but I don't think you can go any higher than that and assuming obviously.
Like we've said that you're not able to reach a higher peak.
So this is really absolutely this is.
This is absolutely beyond worst case scenario.
I'm just kind of enjoying kicking around an idea that might enable me to make the weekly net
stimulus model better.
I have no real kind of expectations beyond that it could turn out to be a complete and utter nothing
burger.
I mean, it could be nothing here.
They're just there's no reason really that I can see that means it's definitely happening.
It's just here are two extrapolations that we could do that get to very similar numbers.
That's it really, and assuming someone.
Were doing 3 * a week then obviously if you've had two days off over the weekend then that first
workout wouldn't be impacted by this even if this were to occur.
So you would only be doing that, you know, 10% calculation on the second and third training session
for the week?
Exactly so.
You could even carve it back a little bit, you know, you could say it's, it's got to be, you know,
corrected.
Yes, if you're doing every other day, you're going to have that problem.
But if you're doing every other day, your numbers are going to be so ridiculously high compared with
two times a week that it's not even going to be worth doing.
You know, you're never going to see a difference there that's worth even talking about with this 10
percent, 20% discount.
Yeah, what you mean is?
What I mean?
Is that every other day is going to obliterate 2 * a week so badly that no amount of discounting is
going to change anything?
I mean, I don't think any amount of discounting is going to change anything with three times a week
either, but with every other day it's going to be so ridiculous it's not even worth talking about.
Now a question.
That people I've seen come up about this is OK, if a single set is back at baseline 24 hours and
three sets is let's say 36 or whatever you want to say, how does that change the weekly net
stimulus?
How can you compare different set volumes with different potential Myops timelines?
So are they?
Are they asking here about stimulus periods then?
Because yeah, basically.
Ultimately the problem.
They're assuming.
About stimulus periods, and they're assuming that myops is synonymous with that, so you can't.
You can't actually do that.
So you can't say that if Myops is elevated, then we're in a stimulus period because you're not
seeing what muscle protein breakdown is doing.
Also, you're not seeing where the stimulus is.
Sorry, you're not seeing where the synthesis is sending the proteins to O.
There's four really good situations in the literature where we can go and we can see where
elevations in my fibula protein synthesis are happening and hypertrophy is not.
So we can look at what I call non exercise muscle damage.
So like a contusion, A bruise, anything like that.
There's a bunch of different animal models you can look at and what happens is the researchers will
do a small intervention.
They'll create a small amount of damage in the muscle in a way that's not exercise related.
And then they'll look at what happens to muscle protein synthesis rates and it and it elevates, it
increases.
Now this is one of the really interesting things that I've talked about previously, which is that
the elevation is quite delayed and the delay tends to be longer the more severe the damage is.
Processes that need to occur take longer.
So generally speaking, if you produce a rather unpleasant contusion in a in a rodent muscle, then it
will probably take about 48 hours before you see a meaningful increase in muscle protein synthesis
rates.
Now, some people have kind of just jumped on that and gone.
Muscle damage only starts repairing after 48 hours.
Well, no.
If you create an enormously severe contusion in a rodent model, that's what happens.
If you're creating a less severe damage than the processes that are required to go through to
finish, the process of dealing with that damage happen a lot more quickly.
So I think that in human muscle in response to strength training, you're probably dealing with about
a 24 hour period in which the process is necessary to complete the damage or occurring.
And then your second 24 hour period, that's when you're repairing the damage with the elevation and
muscle protein synthesis.
So I think if you looked in humans, you would see that it's day 2 when your damage repair is
happening.
It's the very severe contusion situations that we see in the rodent models.
That's when you see it being pushed out longer than 48 hours.
So that's the category one.
Category two would then be aerobic exercise.
We've got some really nice data in humans showing that aerobic exercise workouts elevate myofibular
protein synthesis rates for quite a few days.
Now when those same workouts are done in a string to form a training program, you don't get any
hypertrophy happening.
So again, you can see that aerobic exercise is elevating the synthesis of the proteins.
That's not translating into hypertrophy.
It's just that you're dealing with higher turnover, you're not dealing with higher protein
accretion.
You can also see it in situations where we look at, say, static stretching causing
sarcomereidenesis.
If you have static stretching causing sarcomereidenesis, then what you're going to see then is
protein accretion occurring with additional sarcomeres in series, but you're not going to see
anything related to the diameter of the fiber with additional myofibrils.
Now, if you put some animal in a cast and you cause sarcomerogenesis by sort of leaving the limb in
a mobilized position for a long period of time, the immobilization will cause the loss of
myofibrils, but the stretch will cause the addition of sarcomers.
This is basically why sarcomerogenesis and my fibrilla addition cannot possibly be stimulated by the
same thing.
That's a separate conversation, but here we can see that you can have an elevation in synthesis
rates, adding proteins onto the end of the fiber to make new sarcomers, but they're not actually
causing the addition of myofibrils because you can see them being lost in the atrophy processes that
you're doing.
And finally, you can basically just eat some protein and that will elevate your muscle protein
synthesis rates and it won't cause the muscle to get bigger.
It won't cause protein accretion.
You're just having a higher turnover.
Now, some people get very upset when I say that because they go, if I eat protein after a workout,
then the muscle grows more than if I don't eat protein.
Yes, but that's not what we're saying.
The stimulus came from the workout.
The protein feeding was just allowing that to be, you know, maximized or optimized.
If you eat protein on it's own, it doesn't change the accretion of protein in the fibre.
You can't eat protein and magically make the fibres bigger.
If that was possible.
Then when immobilization situations occur, such as in cases of, you know, maybe somebody has to go
into hospital or the some kind of operation and they're in bed for a few days and they lose muscle
mass, if you could just feed them protein and stop that happening, we would do that.
And it doesn't work.
It's been tested a whole bunch of times and it doesn't work.
People still believe that it works because somebody tells them that it does online and it doesn't,
you know, so we've got these four scenarios where you can clearly see elevations in my OPS or NPS
are happening, you know, and you're not actually don't believe that people believe all kinds of
weird stuff like it's because it's.
Something that I saw a lot back in the day, you know, this is when I was sort of hanging out more
bodybuilding forums and stuff and I'd hear people talking about going vacation, just eat piece of
protein.
And I guess I sort of have changed my circles and don't see that as as much anymore.
But every now and then I do still see it pop up.
And I think it is still a pretty prevailing belief amongst a lot of people that if you just see, if
you can't train, you're going away on vacation, you seek whatever, you just eat more protein.
And it will somehow it maybe won't mitigate all of it, but it will certainly prevent atrophy to a
large extent.
Because it seems to, you know, the increase in MPs is going to build muscle.
And what you said there's it's not a stimulus, it's you can eat all the protein you want by itself.
It's never going to be a muscle building stimulus.
I think nothing is.
Nothing is changing there.
So that's just an illustration of four places that you can go and look in the literature and see
that elevations in my OPS or MPs happen without a hypertrophy stimulus being present.
So it's very clear that you cannot just go to a study and go look, Myops rates were elevated for
this period of time.
Therefore, that's the same thing as the stimulus period.
No, it's not.
It's absolutely not because if you've got damage repair happening and damage repair is very well
established to take a very long period of time in certain situations.
So if it really does drag on and on and on, you know, every time you look at a damage model, there's
a whole bunch of these.
As I've said, you got contusion models in mice.
They're even now developing contusion models in humans where they'll put a plastic tube on top of
your quadriceps muscle and they'll drop a small weight down the tube from a fixed height and it
could cause a small bruise in the quadriceps.
And then they can go and measure that and explore what's happened.
So they they've got these models, they also have extremely fast eccentric contractions, which if you
do them fast enough, pretty much have no cross bridging happening and you just get literally tearing
of various sort of membrane structures and the whole load of calcium ions flooding into the fire and
creating all kinds of damage.
And you can get the same kind of thing if you look at a post injury profile of what the NPS or Myops
then does, it really does just kind of bump along just above baseline showing that it's doing
things, it's elevated, but it's not doing the spiky thing that we get with a workout.
Do a workout.
There's ridiculous spike in MPs post workout for the first kind of 6 to 8 hours.
You create damage and it just bumps along above baseline because it can't really, you know, kind of
do what it needs to do at the same kind of speed that, you know, the hypertrophy thing can do.
Is there an initial?
Spike with the damage?
No, not at all.
In fact, there's actually an initial drop because what you get is a drop in MPs as the damage repair
processors or damage kind of completion processes really is what we should call them because they're
kind of tidying away the stuff that's been damaged.
It's kind of like clearing the ground, if you like, for the new structures to come in and replace
the old structures.
So you kind of got debris everywhere.
You've got this just junk lying around all over the place, and these kind of inflammatory cells come
in and they clear it all the way.
And while that's happening, you can't really have the builders in doing what they need to do.
The clearing process has got to happen and you can bring the builders in and you get a drop.
You get a drop in MPs as this is happening because you can't do the work you need to.
And then it kind of comes back above baseline and then you get this kind of grind, long slow grind
of things, you know, being done.
So and that's the absolutely, absolutely ubiquitous finding across all of the damage models.
You just get this long slow process happening.
So I think, you know, realistically it would be damage I would expect to create this kind of issue.
The question, people.
May have when they look at the myop stuff is OK.
If, if the first portion of this is preferentially shuttled towards hypertrophy in the second
portion, more damage repair, then why do we not see a spike after the hypertrophy is mostly
completed and then the damage repair begins?
And that's something I've seen so clear quite a lot as a critique of this.
And so ultimately what you just said there's, well, you wouldn't expect to see a second spike.
That's not the way damage.
That's not the way damage repair.
Works.
No, not at all, not at all.
All of the damage models show this long, slow kind of grind, as it deals with stuff over a / a
period of time.
Now, obviously you have to remember that damage models are extreme and they're designed to produce
effects that we can see and they do therefore have that bigger delay and they have a a longer
timeline.
I mean, in rodent models, you can see muscle damage out for weeks.
You know, I mean, that's because they're looking to create an effect that they can track and observe
and, you know, not have to worry about the stats because the effect is so big you can't miss it.
You've got to kind of bring that down and say it's a much smaller impact when you're dealing with
strength training workers.
Now added on to that, we can of course program in ways that avoid that problem.
You know, I mentioned earlier, one of the reasons why I think the bird can be extrapolated out to 60
hours is because they're using 14 Rep Max's.
You know, if you were using 8 Rep Max's, I don't think you would see that effect.
So.
In terms of kind of how this matters when we're looking at programming.
So there's one idea that you sort of dispel there that OK, if my office is elevated, it's protective
and there's no atrophy that can be occurring and that is safeguarding these muscle fibers.
And at the same time, there's 22 parts to that.
So firstly, it's protective and secondly, it inhibits you building or stimulating more growth.
And yes, it's funny, isn't?
It because I've actually made this point a couple of times online on on Instagram recently and I had
a bunch of hypertroid researchers message me saying is this really contentious?
Do people, do people actually think that, you know, just because myopsy is elevated that the muscle
is automatically in an anabolic state and can't shrink?
I mean, it's like, you know, these were people who'd actually read a little bit outside.
I think of the immediate area though, that I know them and they're, they're well read people and
they're like, well, you know, the sarcomereogenesis literature shows you that, you know, all the
protein feeding literature shows you that, you know, there are kind of people who'd done some kind
of extra work outside.
I think there are people in the hypertrophy community who think that, yeah, if Myops is elevated,
then the muscles in an all about state, it can't possibly shrink.
I'm like, what?
Here are 4 situations that prove you wrong.
And I think people have kind of just got it nailed into their mind that if Myops is elevated or MPs
is elevated, that the muscle is in a stimulus period.
That isn't what the data show you.
It clearly shows you you can have MPs or my OPS elevations without being in a stimulus period.
So you've kind of got to be very clear about what you think is going on with the hypertrophy
stimulus and the damage for repair processes.
And any a simple review of the damage literature will show you that it's a long slow process and
that it requires those clearing away things to happen before you can actually start building new
printings.
I almost don't bother responding to people when they say we don't think that you're correct.
We think that damage repair is happening in the 1st 24 hours.
I'm like, well, you're just telling me you haven't done any reading because, you know, it's really
obvious that that first 24 hours, you need that period of time to actually clear the ground.
You know, damage is actually still ongoing in that period of time and clearing away the damage is
also ongoing in that period.
You don't get the opportunity to build anything until probably, you know, 24 hours.
So it's actually very, very clear in the literature.
And it's, it's a great shame that I think that more hypertrophy researchers don't actually read the
muscle damage in the in the particular.
It'd be interesting to.
Do a study where they did like say shorter position isometrics and then mapped out what that was
doing from in my OPS timeline.
Like something that that involved very little damage.
It's still a high degree of stimulus and see how long that well, I think you get pretty.
Close to that with what Bird did with his single set protocol.
Yeah, but could.
Be could be achieve a higher peak and still be back down relatively quickly if you redid.
The bird study with like 678 Rep maxes then I think you would probably what you would see is an
almost identical profile in the 1st 20 hours, 18 hours and then you would see it start to go back to
baseline much faster after that.
That would be my prediction.
OK, so my OPS is.
Not protecting you from catastrophy occurring and it's not innate and not ensuring that you're in
this anabolic period Myops is because Myops.
Has got to be balanced by what's happening with breakdown rates.
You can't just say it's like you've given some really wonderful analogies over the last couple of
months we've been trying to explain to people in terms of budgeting money or, you know, filling
bathtub with water or whatever.
Basically, you're pouring water into a bathtub with, with with, with your, with your synthesis
rates.
And if you're if you've left the plug out or if you've got a really big hole in the in the in the
bucket, that's your breakdown rate.
Now essentially, yes, you've got a balance between those two rates.
But if you've got a really big hole or multiple holes in the bucket, then it doesn't matter really
how much water you're pouring in the top.
You're going to see a serious kind of net outflow.
So the synthesis and breakdown rates have got to be balanced or you've got to understand the, the
relationship between the two.
And you can't just say, well, synthesis rates are up, therefore I'm in an anabolic state and I'm
going to have net protein accretion across the way.
Well, no, not necessarily.
And like you discussed.
Earlier then obviously it doesn't inhibit you from achieving A secondary stimulus worst case
scenario you just like you said shaves that top 10% or so off it if we're being really quite.
So worst case assuming that we can't increase the peak any higher.
So there's I mean they're the two primary arguments that I'm seeing people present about this that
it's protective and it stops you from experiencing another gross stimulus and including both of
those don't particularly make any sense.
Is there anything else that's important to know about all of this so.
I think we've covered all of the important details there.
I think what I would like people to take home though, from this podcast is that there is a very
clear reason why MYOPS rates being elevated might cause a problem.
You know, and that reason is we have cellular machinery that makes proteins and if it's still doing
things from the last workout, it has less capacity to do things for your next workout.
That's it.
That's the rationale.
That's what we're all talking about.
So the question is, how big is that effect?
The question is not, you know, is it happening or is it not happening?
That doesn't really tell you anything.
I mean, okay, sure, if it's not happening then you can discard it.
But if it is happening, you still don't know how big the effect is.
And I think there's a lot of people running around with the idea that you have to get miles back
down the baseline.
All the other workout is pointless.
Now that idea just needs to go because that is not what anybody is talking about who understands
this stuff.
Anybody who's starts to to dive into how ribosomes work and what we're dealing with when we're
talking about producing, you know the new proteins, they are aware that we're dealing with a
capacity for producing them that is kind of more or less fixed unless you kind of increase it with
training, which is what happens.
But in the post workout period that's not really changing very much.
So you've got a temporary ability to increase the rate of proteins up to a fixed point.
Now then good to say, well, how much does that impact me?
Now what we've seen is that the maximum impact really is around 10 to 20%.
And that assumes that you are trying to Max out your stimulus, which you've made the point we're
not.
With three sets you're not.
Maybe with six to eight sets you are, but with three sets you're not.
So it might actually be a completely and utterly irrelevant point for people who are training with
one to three sets.
F probably is for one set, but it might be a completely relevant point for three sets as well.
So the maximum possible magnitude to this effect is around about sort of 10 to 20%.
That's what I'd hope people can take over.
And again, like we said.
There's a calculator, they go have a play, plug these numbers in and you can you can do all this
stuff yourself and you can see you can compare 2 * a week, 3 * a week, different sets and you can
exactly and just to be.
Super, super clear with people because I've had a couple of people message me saying I don't
understand what this number is telling me and they've kind of, they've put that current program into
the calculator and it's given them 3.1 and they've gone.
Is that good?
I'm like, well that's not what it does.
You put two programs in and you compare the numbers and the higher one is better.
You know, I mean, within kind of boundaries of what's possible.
Yeah.
The only thing you can tell you in absolute terms is if the number is positive, then you've got net
hypertroy over the week.
If the number is negative, then it doesn't work.
That's the only absolute, the thing you can draw from the program.
So if you put your program in and you're doing 2 sets of the extensions once a week and you're
interested in whether your rec firm is going to grow, it will tell you.
It won't tell you it's not going to give you a number above 0, because it won't.
If you put in three or four sets, and depending on what your assumptions are, it might give you a
slightly positive number.
But ultimately that's the only case.
And a number is going to mean anything on its own.
You're supposed to put two programs in that you're comparing, not simultaneously of course, but one
after the other.
And then you, I have to do these disclaimers because you know people, I'm trying to put both
programs in and it's not working.
I'm like just put one in and then press calculate and then you can even open 2.
Tabs you can do that.
You could even open 2.
Tabs that is allowed, but you know it's just compare two programs that you're interested in that you
like and it will tell you which one is likely to be better than the other.
Once you've done that a handful of times, you'll see that there's a fairly clear pattern and it's
going to give you a very predictable answer.
Now, if you're a super user and you want to get into the really nitty gritty stuff and start putting
in like changing between data sets, appellant and Schoenfeld and playing around with stimulus period
durations and all that stuff, you can use it for that purpose.
But that isn't what it was originally for.
It was originally just a thought experiment to show what the physiological assumptions that we can
rely on would predict about training frequency.
And it shows, broadly speaking, that if you're using recoverable volumes, you're going to end up
with three being better than two being better than one.
And every other day is probably better than I was drag kicking and screaming into admitting that
because I don't like training that way.
But you know, 3.5 is better than three, which is better than two, which is better than one.
Now what you'll find is that the long term training studies only kind of, or we did in the last
podcast only map loosely on top of that.
They show the same direction, but they don't give the granularity.
But that's what models are supposed to do.
They're supposed to give you more granularity over areas that you haven't got clarity over.
Be confident about your assumptions.
You make sure it does direction.
They track with the long term data, which it does.
And then you can move forward with a bit more confidence that your model is telling you, you know,
useful things rather than rubbish.
And that's kind of where we are.
And it's, it's just really fascinating to watch people tie themselves in knots to try and find ways
to criticize this picture because I think it's relatively clear, you know, obviously people have
vested interests in arguing against it, you know, so it's fun to watch.
But there we are.
I mean, you mentioned that.
You were dragged kicking and screaming about every other day.
That's for me.
And you know, you just said, hey, you can play with these different data sets.
You can do XYZ with the calculator.
And like I've done that, you know, I've sort of plugged in.
OK, absolute worst case scenario that doesn't, I don't think even physiologically makes sense.
What would need to occur for XYZ split to be better or worse?
And it's not that either of us are coming to this wanting necessarily a particular split to come out
on top.
But I mean, like you said you would drive kicking and screaming with every other day.
I was the same with full body.
I didn't want full body to be better.
I was super resistant to that.
That was everything against what I was taught and what I enjoyed.
And now I make this point to people online all the time.
That enjoyment, I think first and foremost, and maybe I'm, I'm sort of projecting here, but I think
enjoyment comes from what works.
And when people tell me, oh, I don't enjoy full body.
What I've seen with my clients, not every single one, but I'd say probably 90% of the time is when
they start getting better results, they start enjoying it.
And they might have thought they didn't enjoy full body, but hey, you know when this is the best
result I've had in the lifting free out, suddenly they start enjoying it.
But that's really hard to.
It's really hard to argue with that feeling of motivation you get when things are going your way,
yeah.
Yeah, but you know, that's an aside, like we're not wed to full body.
When you look at this physiological model, it makes sense.
When I look at what people did before steroids, it makes sense is what they were doing.
When I look at the anecdote, and yes, it's anecdote of the hundreds and potentially thousands of
clients I've used full body with now compared to other splits, it's reducing better results.
If suddenly the reality of the universe changed and another split started to outperform that, I'm
sure you're going to jump over to that.
I don't want full body to be better.
It's just what all of these data and evidence points are telling us at this point.
Yes, I mean I.
Think you can get a lot of, I mean, I know that people are still, I know that some people are still
dragging their feet a little bit about the lack of clarity in the long term training studies.
And I'm very sympathetic to that.
You know, I would be much happier if the long term training studies were definitively showing 3 is
better than two, 2 is better than one.
And you know, all the rest of it.
That's just not the world we live in.
We don't have that clarity in the frequency data.
We have to gather what information exists and we have to map it out on top of each other.
And we say, does does a pattern exist here?
And we've got, you know, as I made a point recently on TikTok, yes, I'm back on TikTok.
If you haven't seen me there, I'm now there.
I made a point on Twitter, which is to say that, you know, the pre 1950s bodybuilders and their
records of what they did is the most reliable, the very best source of anecdotal evidence you're
ever going to see.
You know, every single bit of anecdotal evidence I see online at the moment, I just simply ignore
because I don't know that I can trust it.
You know, now you go back to that period of time and you've got much more confidence because they
didn't have anything that was creating a anabolic effect other than the strength training programs.
You know, you map that and everybody's training three times a week.
You then look at the physiological data that we've got and what that predicts and that predicts 3 *
a week or 3 1/2 sometimes split ahead.
And then you look at the long term training trials and it gives you 3 is better than one and
everything else is a bit kind of unclear.
And it's like all together that is pointing in the same direction.
Yeah, I would.
I would love to see better long term trials, but we just haven't got that data set through anything
else that needs.
To be said or is that I think we're good I.
Think we're good for the day?
So we shall see how the Internet responds to my back of the envelope calculations using those two
studies.
I'm sure they will have a list of reasons why they think that I can't do what I've just done, which
I will studiously ignore and carry on doing what I do.
It just seems to be a trend where people basically wait for me to say something and then explain why
they think I'm wrong.
But we should see what happens.
Yes, it is a.
Trend that is true, I think and you know I don't want to make this a whole conversation but there's
an expectation I shouldn't have even sighted this there's an expectation that you know people will
make a critique or something we've said or you know a video you put out or whatever and that you're
expected to always respond to everyone making demands on and it's an odd belief and I just kind of
just want to name it that hey this is that is what that belief is expecting that entitlement is
what.
It is.
It is entitlement.
I don't.
Want to call it that but it is.
And someone is.
Is able to respond to that I have no issues someone says hey I want to respond to every single
person who's talking about me or making a claim about OK go for it and I think at the same time you
also have a a right to not do that and to enjoy your life and do other things and put out
information and people can do and say and think what they want about it It's the it's.
The trend that you we see now, I think for people to try and shame you for not responding.
So I'll see like some comments we directed them and they'll say, why aren't you responding to so and
so about this or, you know, why have you, you know, kind of ignored that particular critique?
I'm like, well, because I don't have time because I don't think it's worth talking about, because I
think it's a weak argument.
Any number of reasons.
I'm just like, you know, feel free to tell me that, you know, there's a critique that people are
getting.
I mean, I don't get it.
Don't get me wrong.
You know, I'm not going to get upset with people for telling me that there are critiques out there.
I mean, please do that.
I mean, I find it fascinating to see what what people come out with.
But yeah, sometimes you feel like people expect it of you.
And it's like, well, that's not really how this works.
I do wonder it's.
Just a inequality in people's spare time.
What's it other people who are making these?
Yeah, maybe because they think they've.
Got the time they, they could, they could spare the time that they think you could spare the time.
That's probably fair.
But you know, I'm, I'm, I'm not averse to hearing these things.
If people say, you know, I'm, I've heard this criticism, by all means, you know, do that comment,
share it with me, whatever.
I don't object to hearing it.
I was just commenting that I find it odd when people, you know, kind of try to shame you for not
addressing these things because it's not.
Well, where where are you getting the idea from that you have that kind of right to tell me what I
should be spending my time on?
That doesn't really seem appropriate.
And but I'm.
Yeah.
I find it fascinating to see what mental gymnastics people come up with for wriggling out of the
logical quandaries that they find themselves in.
And no doubt that this podcast will be very similar because I'm sure that the people who have been
arguing that elevated micro protein administrates cause problems in high frequency programs or
listen to this and be very distraught that the data don't really support it being that big of a
problem after all.
And, you know, challenging.
The status quo is always uncomfortable for people who follow that or have benefited from that, so we
will no doubt see a lot of unhappy people, I'm sure.
But our goal is always to provide value and not going to say our goal is not.
Happy people, then that is.
That's the.
Goal of this forecast, unhappy people.
Now we always want to provide you guys to value and not just add noise to the space.
And I think we've transitioned into adding noise right now.
So we're going to stop.
That's it done today and hopefully join us again next week.