Episode: 030 Everyone's wrong about muscle activation + how to compare hypertrophy programs (WNS)
URL: https://open.spotify.com/episode/79bXOB6wLDlcovltBn4Wyu
Published: 2025-12-14
================================================================================

Welcome back everyone to another episode of Hypertrophy past and present.
And today it's kind of like present and present because I'm going to be introducing you guys to
another more modern bodybuilding plan, so a golden era plan.
I mentioned a few weeks ago that I wanted to start contrasting some of our silver era plans.
We spent about six months now talking about and contrasting them to what we see more in the modern
bodybuilding era, sort of golden age and a little bit later.
So today I'm going to come at you with a a golden era bodybuilding plan.
Now before I do, Chris, how are you doing today?
I'm not too bad.
Thanks, Jake.
I mean, the storm that we had here last night nearly tore the roof off the block of flowers that I
live in.
And it was a pretty, pretty unpleasant experience to kind of tidy up after that.
But yeah, I mean, I'm in one piece and I'm pretty tired.
But yeah, not too bad really.
So a little bit safe to drive, a little bit catabolic basically.
Deprived.
Very much so, yeah.
So I am going to introduce you guys to a plan from a guy named Ken Waller.
And now some of you will be familiar with Ken because he was actually in the Pumpy Iron documentary.
So you guys have seen that I'm sure.
Well, some of you will recognize Ken Waller.
So Ken Waller won Missy Universe in 1971 and then he won again in 1974 and then he went on to win
the tall division for the Mr. Olympia, I think in 191976.
So the plan we're going to talk about today was a routine that he published in 1975 S right when he
was in the middle of winning Mr. Universes and then about to go compete in the Olympia.
Now, Ken is relatively open or has been open about the fact that he did use anabolics.
There's no sort of surprises there.
And you know, this is relatively early on in the anabolic era.
It's about sort of, I guess, a decade or maybe just after a decade or longer than a decade since
they sort of would have been widely used in bodybuilding.
So I guess what we're seeing here is fairly early stages of how training has changed.
Now the anabolics are more or less than norm.
Now this is quite different to what we've talked about in the past.
Obviously a lot of the silly area plans were full body.
They were three days a week.
This is a four day a week plan.
Now it's a two way split.
So he had a a Monday and a Thursday workout and he had a Tuesday and a Friday workout.
Now I was trying to work out exactly what this this split was and I couldn't quite work it out.
It's kind of it's almost full body except the second workout doesn't have quads, but apart from that
it's relatively full body for each day.
So I don't know deal with that as you will, but let me let me describe the two workouts.
So this is workout A.
So again, repeat it twice a week.
Now we start with carves so.
We've got 8.
Sets of 15 repetitions of donkey calf phrase.
Now he can PE concluded those sets with some top partials.
Now I think we've seen top partials in the calf exercise before.
I forget who it was, but we did discuss this in a silver.
You're a plant, perhaps Reg.
Maybe.
I do remember that and I don't remember who it was and what the exercise was.
They were doing the partials in though.
May have even been donkey calf I I I I feel like it was Reg and there was a.
Photo I showed.
You where he had people sitting on his back and I think we sort of concluded it was probably a, you
know, a method just to make it more challenging based on the limited load availability.
But perhaps I'm wrong there.
I'm sure there's listeners who are listening and be like, no, it wasn't meant to lose songs.
I so I do apologize if I'm incorrect there.
You look deep in thought.
Shall I move on?
I can't remember.
No, I genuinely can't remember what it was, but I do remember that we did have that as an example
before.
Yeah.
Maybe it'll come to me.
Well, you can keep reflecting on that and I'll keep moving on.
So the next exercise we have is a barbell squat.
Now again, we've got 7 sets here actually.
So I said eight sets for the cast, 7 for the for this squat.
Now the first set was a bit of a warm up set, so it's a set of 12.
But he does specify that this is not taken to failure like it's what Max effort?
And then it's descending repetition.
So we go 1087655 S, 2 sets of 5 S After our seven sets of squats, we go into five sets of lying leg
curl.
Now what's interesting here, not just for the lying leg curl, but for some of these exercises is for
some of them he does specify how long to rest between sets.
Some of them he doesn't, but some he does.
And for lying leg curl he does say less than 60 seconds.
Now this is I think an important shift we see when we start looking at these anabolic plans is we
start seeing grace periods end up getting a lot shorter.
Now after he'd finished his lying leg curls, he sort of concluded his lower body stuff of the day
and then he did a bit of an upper body warm up and that consisted.
Of two sets of.
10 to 15 repetitions of chin ups and dips as a super set.
So just body weight and then he went into his first, I guess working exercise, which was a barbell
bench.
And this was five sets.
Again, the first set was a set of 12 which was not taking to failure.
He did a, he did do like a warm up set set before this and this was like 1/2 warm up, half working
set and then a set of 10866.
Now here he did dress a little bit longer.
He did suggest about one to two minutes.
So still relatively short, but not as short as some of these other exercises.
And then after the five sets of barbell bench, we then have five sets of dumbbell incline bench or
press.
We've got five sets of eight, and this was about 60 to 90 seconds between sets.
So fair bit of chess work there, 10 sets.
And then we go into wide grip lat pull downs, five sets of eight.
And this was with less than a minute between sets and then wide grip bent over barbell row, five
sets of eight.
So we've got 10 sets of chest, 10 sets of back.
And then he concludes with a set of chin UPS to failure, so as many reps as possible, body weight
and a set of dips to failure with as many reps as possible.
So a failure monstrous.
Workout A and then workout B follows A somewhat similar pattern in terms of sets and repetitions.
We do start with with ABS here.
So we start with Roman chest set up.
And this is one set of as many reps as possible up to 50s I think he said when you get to 50 you
might add add some weight or do something to make it harder.
And also a bent knee, leg raise.
So, lying flat on the floor, bent knees, bringing your feet towards the ceiling, one set of as many
as possible.
And then a bent over twist.
So imagine you've got like AI think he suggested using a broomstick.
So imagine you've got like a broomstick across your back, like a squat position.
And then you're twisting, bringing that groove stick down towards your foot and then twisting to the
other side.
And this is 1 sort of 50 on each side.
And then we've got our donkey calf razors again.
So he's doing the same calf exercise.
And so that was eight sets with his top partials.
And then he does his upper body warm up.
So again, same thing instead of or two sets of chin UPS and tips, super set in and then the upper
body workout for the day, it was a standing barbell press.
Now this is done with a shoulder width grip.
So I guess a bit more kind of sagittal plane.
And this was five sets 108666 and then five sets are behind the neck overhead press and this is five
sets of 6.
So we've got 10 sets of shoulders there.
I do think that the excise selection is quite interesting and I'm sure we'll touch on that.
And then we've got barbell curls, 5 sets of eight with one minute between sets.
And I think this is quite interesting too.
He then did one arm concentration curls, 5 sets of eight.
So, you know, a lot of a lot of biceps work here, 10 sets.
But what he did specify was to rest about 30 to 60 seconds between arms.
So you do one arm, 30 seconds, other arm, 30 seconds, other arm 30 seconds.
And I mean, I like that.
That's something I actually use in my programs is just split that, that rest period between sides
and we can maybe touch on that in a moment.
And then he did a barbell triceps ext 5 sets of eight with about a minute between sets, one arm
triceps ext 5 sets of 88866 and then concluded with feet elevated close grip push ups.
So again, I guess more triceps focused and those two sets of as many reps as possible.
So All in all, we're looking at what 10:00-ish direct sets, 10 or 12 direct sets per muscle group
give or take per workout.
And that was at least twice per week.
But in for some of these muscles, it was in fact I guess four times a week.
And just before I hear your thoughts, I do want to mention one thing.
He did actually say that for optimum results you do want to be doing about 11:50 sets per muscle.
And this is a bit I want to highlight.
He did say that.
He said that you may have heard people talk about doing fewer sets.
He says that this there's an idea that you can only do or you can get away with only doing four or
five sets per muscle group.
And this I thought was quite funny.
He said that this is an ancient belief, which, OK, you know, sort of maybe 2 decades old at that
point in time.
It's a bit more ancient now, but it is interesting to see at that moment in time how this idea of
doing give or take four sets per muscle group per workout, which had been the top end of volume and,
you know, relatively normal for people for decades, is now seen as ancient.
And now the the understanding, the common belief is you need to do 1012 sets per muscle per workout.
Some fairly big changes, hey?
Yeah.
I mean, I mean, technically it's not wrong.
I mean, it is ancient in the sense that is the way that everyone trained from like the ancient
Greeks onwards to kind of like, you know, the 1960s.
But yeah, I can see how it comes across a little bit strange.
That's the way he said.
So I don't know where to start really.
I mean, obviously, you know, just reading this is traumatising.
I mean, there's just so much in here.
I mean, I don't really see how much of this is going to be very effective.
Well, let's let me start there.
Let's start with what here is quite intuitive or well done, because there are a few things that I
think are quite good.
Yeah, the exercise selection.
But then arguably he's got everything in the kitchen sink in here.
Yeah, that's kind of sort of cheating.
I mean, exercise selection is, is, is kind of one of those things where if somebody gets it right
and they're only doing a small number of exercises, you're like, that's impressive.
Whereas if somebody's got everything in the kitchen sink in a program, you're like, it's not quite
so impressive.
So.
But you're right, there's, there's a couple of, you know, there's a, for example, the back
exercises, we've got a wide grip that pull down, which straight away is, you know, something that
we've generally not seen in many of the other earlier programs.
And it's called see that because it's going to do different, you know, frontal plane pull downs do a
fundamentally different thing from size to plane pull downs.
So that's, that's really interesting to see that don't think there is anything explicitly written
here as a sagittal plane pull, but there's obviously the wide grip row which is going to be, you
know, very different again.
I mean he does do chins, which I imagine would be closer.
Probably going to be closer to close grip, aren't they?
So yeah, I mean from a combination of exercise point of view, you've got three really solid back
exercises.
If if you have got a pure sagittal plane shoulder width pull like a, a chin up would be I suppose.
And then you've got a a wide grip like pull down, which is very frontal lane.
And then you've also got a wide grip row which is very transverse lane.
I think that combination is pretty much covering the back very, very well.
You could argue that you'd want a shrug in there and I don't think he does have a shrug in here, but
you know, from a kind of starting from zero, you know, that would be a really good start on a, on a
back program, I think.
Well, you noticed when you're reading through, you made a comment, you noticed that the, the
shoulder, especially the pressing stuff is quite nicely combined because you've got the, the
shoulder width press which we don't often see, which is very, very anterior delt dominant.
And then you've got the press behind neck, which is again frontal plane very middle delt dominant.
So that's a really nice combination.
So it's kind of achieving the same kind of thing that we've just seen with the back.
You're getting that with the with the shoulders.
And this is 1 where he didn't throw the kitchen sink at the deltoids.
He only really had those two direct exercises and you could argue he he really nailed it with those
two.
Definitely, Yeah, that's, that's, that's two really nicely kind of combined or two exercises that
pair really well together.
In terms of chest, I mean, there's not really a lot to say.
I mean, he's got a bench press in there and then he's got an incline press in on top.
I think this is an interesting moment just to remind people that the the old, not old, but the kind
of traditional within the modern building bodybuilding kind of sphere of the idea that incline
benches how you target, you know, the clavicular part of the PEC.
You know, really you kind of want a close grip rather than the the kind of the incline, the close
grip is this as to plain version of a of a bench press is going to do much more for the clavicular
PEC than than an inclined press is going to do.
If that inclined press is done with a wider grip.
So you know you.
Could combine them obviously and do close grip.
Of course.
Absolutely slight incline on your on your close grip bench.
And yeah, I mean that'll probably be, you know, slightly more effective than just doing it as a flat
bench, but it's the plane of motion that matters more than the incline in this particular case.
I'm not seeing anything else in there, I don't think for the pecs like a pullover or anything.
I mean, that's an interesting observation.
Pullover kind of gone by this point.
I mean, I guess you know, hamstrings, we've just got the the leg curl I think.
I don't think there's anything else back extensions.
There's not actually any hinging either, is there?
No, I mean, obviously we've got the bent over row if you want to put any sort.
Of some people, the way some people do it definitely looks like a hip hinge, doesn't it?
I mean, but yeah, I mean, and there's a lot of fluff in here with the kind of the AB work which
isn't doing anything at 50 reps I mean that.
Before you get stuck into your body working, yes.
We're described as a very light load.
I mean, this is probably something we're going to come back to in a future episode when we talk
about the interactions between anabolics and training programmes.
But you can at least here see there is a emphasis on cardiovascular.
So he is, as you say, putting in exercise at the beginning.
He's got his pull ups and his press UPS in done before he starts his upper body workout.
He's got high Rep AB work in before he starts his other workout and there's a lot of short rest
periods for pretty much all of the exercises that he's doing.
A lot of it is going to create a very large amount of cardiovascular activity.
He's going to be breathing hard throughout most of these sessions.
As a result, he's going to hit muscular failure.
I mean, people don't understand what muscular failure is.
Let me just specify.
So when we say muscular failure, we mean the point, which is task failure.
It's just the hypertroid researchers don't read fatigue research, so they don't realise there was
already a term existing, so they kind of invented one which they didn't need to do.
But muscular failure just means that you hit a point at the end of a string training set where you
can't do another repetition or task failure is that exact same definition in the context of the
fatigue literature.
The point is that if you have a cardiovascular sensation going on, you're going to have a, you're
going to be closer to your maximum tolerable perception of effort for the same level of motive
recruitment.
So you're actually going to have lower recruitment on most of the sets in this workout simply
because of that cardiovascular activity going on in the background.
And what's really interesting is that, you know, you do see some of the bodybuilders who are, you
know, kind of famous for having competed at the highest level commenting on this issue.
They do often say, oh, well, you know, you don't want to get to a point where your cardiovascular
system is causing you to reach failure.
You know, there's a couple of famous examples of people making that statement.
But nevertheless, it does seem to be a fairly common theme for that to happen.
And this is a great program to illustrate that point.
And I think those, those of you who are listening to this and and are kind of, you know, have a have
a have a mindset that likes to unravel problems, might like to stop pulling on that thread and see
where you get to is why did we start or why did they start to introduce that element into workouts
at this point?
Is it just because they were doing so much well when they needed to fit it in and didn't want to
still be there at tea time?
You know, is it is it just simply the amount of work that needs to get done that causes these rest
periods to get shorter?
But then how does that square with doing extra kind of high Rep stuff before you start that starts
confusing.
You know, it does feel like they are chasing this cardiovascular sensation rather than just
incorporating it in order to get more work done in less time.
Yeah, that's an interesting observation and potentially we'll talk about that in in sort of coming
episodes.
But I'm starting to change my belief, I guess on some of these steroid steroid era plans where
initially when I saw them, I thought I, I don't know that these people necessarily knew what they
were doing.
Like initially I look at it and be like, look, this isn't effective.
I think there's a lot of, you know, ambiguity that's sort of been baked in with the use of anabolics
that has disconnected their ability to to kind of understand what is and isn't working.
And I think we're just seeing, you know, everything thrown at it and people aren't able to intuit
what's effective.
And now I look at it and I'm like, you know what?
I actually think even if they didn't cognitively necessarily know why they've gone down some of
these paths, I actually think that it evolved in a way that makes sense based on the unique profile
we see that anabolics present.
And I think it's interesting, like you just said there, why might they start with some of these
cardiovascular demanding stuff?
Why might they be doing lots of such a short dress periods?
And I don't think it's just by chance.
I think this stuff's stuck because it met a particular need and whether they they knew what that
need was, I guess directly or not, I think that it it actually was, it did function for a particular
purpose.
Yeah, I can.
I can see where you're coming from on that.
I think I'm probably still slightly behind that point of view.
I'm not all the way there.
I think that, and I definitely think there is a better way of doing what they're trying to do, yes,
but I can, I can see the direction that you're going and I can see why you think that.
But I'd, as I say, I do think there are probably easier and more effective and probably safer ways
of achieving the same thing.
And I also have a, as you know, we often joke about this.
I have a more sceptical viewpoint on many things and cynical even some would say.
And I do think there's a little bit of performative aspect to some of this stuff where it's kind of
designed to look like something that it isn't.
And I think that's again, something we can come back and and talk about in a in a future
conversation.
But yeah, I mean, just in terms of this program, you know, to kind of summarise my thoughts on it,
like you've kind of pointed out, there's some really nice exercise selection in here nevertheless,
despite the the craziness of the volumes.
Really, really good exercise selection in there, but some really fascinating features.
I would say the most fascinating thing about this program is just how much it tells us about like
you're saying, the needs, the specific needs of the bodybuilders of this time in response to the
problems perhaps or the the, the kind of issues that they were facing.
And it really just comes down to this enormous amount of cardiovascular kind of activity they're
going to be generating by using these short rest periods, high volumes and dumping in large numbers
of high Rep body weight stuff all over the place apparently kind of it's.
Book ending.
Both at the start.
And the beginning, middle and the middle and the end is like, stick it all over the place, you know,
kind of like, why is that even there?
And anyway, so just really, really interesting to see this.
And I think it's going to be hopefully a lot clearer to people why it might be there when we come
back and, you know, follow up on this in a future episode.
Now, one final comment I want to make or even question for you.
So obviously people will hear this and like, oh, you know, 10 sets of chess and you know, five sets
of that exercise and eight sets of this exercise.
And obviously we talk a lot about recoverable volume and higher sets obviously causing a longer post
workout recovery period due to the muscle damage that that that volume is causing.
Now, obviously these are high volumes, but what you've mentioned there with this, this body weight
stuff at the start, which is causing some underlying fatigue, these short rest periods and, you
know, just this sort of, yeah, I guess those two things combined this high cardiovascular demand
with the workout.
Ultimately, those sets are going to be less damaging than they would be otherwise in a, you know,
more quite a quote, normal workout program where someone wasn't doing all of this cardiovascular
demanding work.
Yeah.
Exactly.
So very simply, what we're describing here is a psycho biological model of fatigue.
So the brain, when it tries to recruit motor units, is going to produce central motor command to do
that.
It's also going to produce a corollary discharge that we recognize as perception effort.
If we haven't got any other sources of effort, then what happens is we increase that central motor
command to the point where it matches a maximum tolerable perception effort.
The corollary discharge reaches our maximum tolerable perception effort and that is a perfect
scenario where we've got maximum levels of recruitment that are theoretically possible.
Now if you have another source of discomfort, and in this case we're seeing a pretty large one,
which is the cardiovascular activity.
What's going to happen is that cardiovascular activity is going to be recognized as you know, the
burning sensations in the lungs and the elevated heart rate and all of those things.
And that brings us closer to the maximum tolerable perception of effort, but not from the corollary
discharge.
It's now coming from something that isn't producing recruitment.
As a result, we end up with a lower recruitment level at muscular failure.
This is something that a lot of hypertrophy researchers still struggle with and a lot of fitness
influencers really don't get at all.
It's just that you can reach muscular failure without hitting maximum levels of recruitment, even
for your normal levels of recruitment.
I'm not talking about voluntary activation deficits at the moment.
So ultimately if you have all of these kind of short Rep periods, you have the high Rep body weights
at the beginning, you know, when you're doing a lot of volume, you are going to be ultimately not
hitting very high levels of recruitment.
And that means that you're not going to be creating damage in the muscle fibers at the top end of
the motor unit pool, which are the ones that are most susceptible to damage.
So yeah, I think again, what's interesting about this workout plan is that on if you don't have the
rest period information or you ignore the high Rep body weight stuff and it's effect, you might go,
you know, 10 sets twice a week for a body part or even more than that.
Some of them are being trained 4 times a week.
You know, you just go this is totally impossible.
But actually when you kind of realise it's closer to being a kind of a more of an anaerobic type
cardiovascular workout rather than a strength training workout, it starts to look a little bit less
offensive.
Now there's a trade off because you're not just reducing damage, you're also reducing the stimulus
of each one of those things.
Exactly, exactly.
So the stimulus isn't isn't happening.
So again, you know this, this kind of plays perfectly into the hands of those of us who would argue
that anabolics are doing most of the hypertrophy work.
So.
So this brings us to our topic for today, which is weekly and stimulus.
Well, it's, it's kind of a, a quick walk through a couple of issues, starting with weekly net
stimulus because ultimately last week.
So if you haven't listened to our podcast from last week, please go and do that because I'm about to
say won't make any sense.
It ties into what we said last time.
So weekly net stimulus is a model that I built that comprises 3 separate elements and it's designed
to allow you to compare different training programs that have different, you know, volume, frequency
combinations.
So essentially if you're interested in comparing a program with another program to see whether the
other program would be better, you can just put both programs assumptions into a calculator.
Now there is one that you can use or you can calculate in Excel yourself if you want to, and it'll
give you the answer of which of the programs is better.
Now it has three assumptions built in, but it also has a limit that tells you whether or not you can
put the numbers in the whether it's going to make sense or not.
So the three assumptions essentially relate to the workout dose response.
So how much Hypertroid does each extra set create in a workout?
Now there are issues associated with the data sets we've got there because they kind of violate the
principle we've just been talking about, which is that they don't really recognize the rest period
duration.
So the dose response data we've got kind of just drop everything into a hopper and pump out the
answer at the end.
If you're using longer rest periods, you're probably going to find that your dose response curve is
a little bit steeper at the beginning in comparison with somebody who's using a, there's using
shorter rest periods.
Their dose response curve is going to be a lot more stretched out and it may actually be reach a
lower point as well as a result of the, you know, kind of accumulated CNS fatigue.
So essentially we start with the workout response and that's the most fundamental observation about
that is it's non linear.
So essentially each exercise that you do isn't going to be as effective as the previous one, which
straight away kind of anybody who has any kind of mathematical inclination whatsoever is going to
say straight away, Oh, well, that means that higher frequency training is going to be better than
lower frequency training.
It's like it's really interesting talking with people who are engineers or have a math background or
even a science background that doesn't relate to exercise science.
Because as soon as you introduce the concept of a nonlinear dose response or a workout, they go, oh,
right, OK, so I need to train more times per week so I get more earlier sets in the workout, you
know?
Yeah, yeah, that's exactly how you want to train.
And they don't have that hang up that hypertrophy researchers have, which is they've got this thing
in their brain that tells them that they can't say that.
So, so they kind of they miss the obvious kind of math implications.
The second observation is that whenever we are not growing muscle, we are obviously losing muscle,
and this is the atrophy effect that we see.
And the maintenance literature give us this kind of assumption.
So maintenance literature, there's three or four studies out there.
They all show exactly the same thing, which is that if you do 3 or 4 sets once per week, you don't
grow.
Even if you run that study for six months, you don't grow.
So this is one of those interesting areas of research that nobody wants to talk about because as
soon as you talk about it, you realize that, you know, atrophy is happening inside of a training
week and a lot of people don't want to accept that.
So just a minor point on on the side about this, I lose track of the number of times people ask me
to respond to nonsense that they've seen online.
So all the time people are messaging me saying, you know, X person on Instagram or TikTok or
whatever came up with this ludicrous idea.
I want you to tell me why it's not true.
I'm like, why?
I mean, why are you asking me to respond to that nonsense?
I mean, it's like there's no reason that there's no reason that anyone would believe that.
And yet conversely, nobody will respond to my point on the maintenance literature.
Nobody wants to talk about it.
The reason that I want to talk about it is because it definitively shows us that we have got a
atrophy effect happening inside of a training week.
And there's nothing that you can do to argue against it.
So all the studies, as I say, show pretty much the same thing.
Three or four such once per week means that you must have a hypertrophy being produced by that three
or four set workout.
And by the time you get the end of the week, the back end of that week, you've seen atrophy
occurring in those days towards the end of the week.
And that's the assumption #2 and then the assumption #3 which relates to what we talked about last
week is the duration of the stimulus period.
So when we come, just think about that maintenance literature, as I say, you've got a three or four
set workout which produces some stimulus and then you process that stimulus.
And then when the stimulus period ends, you then go into an atrophy period where you lose all of
that stimulus.
Well, how long is that stimulus period?
Now a lot of people have wanted to use the duration of the post workout myofibular protein synthesis
rate elevation to do that.
Now you can and you can't.
So you can in the sense that if you, if you've got a study that shows that your stimulus period
comes back, sorry, if you've got a study that shows that your myofibrilla protein synthesis rate
Ovation comes back down to 0 as in baseline.
That is useful because essentially you're telling us or you're seeing that there can't be any
hypertrophy stimulus past that point where it comes back down to baseline.
Alternatively, if you have a hypertrophy, if you're looking for a hypertrophy stimulus period answer
and you've got a, a MYOPS or an MPs rate elevation that spills out for three or four days.
That doesn't necessarily mean that your stimulus period lasts 3 or 4 days because we know that
damage is delayed and can also elevate MYOPS, as we talked about in last week's conversation.
So on the one hand, if you've got a a relatively short MPs period and it comes back down to baseline
and you're fairly confident that you therefore don't have much, if any damage at all, then you can
be relatively confident that that does represent your hypertrophy stimulus period in that situation.
You can't.
If you've done a reasonably chunky work out of quite a few sets or something else that creates a lot
of damage and you've spilled out over 3 or 4 days.
And it's like that isn't telling you that you've got a hypertrophy stimulus period because your MPs
could be elevated by damage and you can atrophy while you're experiencing damage.
Just look at the traumatic injury literature.
So, you know, I think there's a really kind of important observation to be made there is that MPs
studies don't always give you the answer for how long your stimulus period is if you have a muscle
damage component to that.
But ultimately stimulus period is just going to tell you what your atrophy rate is per day.
It doesn't really tell you necessarily what your atrophy rate looks like per week.
Because if you look at the maintenance studies you've got, say if you imagine your stimulus period
is 2 days, then essentially what you do is you go, well I'm losing 4 sets worth of hypertrophy from
my 4 set workout on Monday.
I'm losing that across five days.
If you make your stimulus period 3 days, you now have to lose that over four days instead of five
days.
You're getting a faster rate of atrophy per day if your MYOPS kind of duration that you're thinking
is your stimulus period is longer rather than shorter.
So the reality is when people start messing around with stimulus periods, which you can do actually
in the calculator for the weakness stimulus model, you, they don't realise that you kind of, you're
robbing Peter to pay Paul.
If you have a, an atrophy, which is 3 or 4 sets worth of atrophy stimulus, you're losing that per
week.
How you allocate that over 4 days or five days or however many days you allocate over that is going
to kind of, you know, sort of change both in One Direction and in the other direction.
So, you know, even though you've got a longest stimulus period, you've now got a faster rate of
atrophy per day as a result of doing that.
So a lot of people don't realize that's how the model works, but that's how it works.
So ultimately, you know, our important thing about the weakness stimulus model is we've just got
those three basic assumptions and then the limit is just, you know, how many sets can you actually
get away with?
So this is kind of what we were just talking about with the golden era plan that you brought us
today.
You know, it's like, can I do 10 sets twice a week?
Well, no, the calculator won't let you put that data in because it would just go, well, that's not
going to be recoverable.
You've kind of got to stick with the, you know, sort of two or three sets recoverable in 48 hours,
four or five sets recoverable in, you know, 72 hours.
And you know, you can kind of go up higher than higher than that, but then you'd sort of into kind
of pro split territory and not many people are using that anymore.
I think most people are either fighting out over full body every other of the day or up a lower
split still, which I I think is really not a very good way of training.
But yeah, so essentially that's that's a reminder of how the weak and stimulus model is working.
And just connecting it back to what we described last time regarding Myops and MPs rates and the
fact that those MPs rates do not guarantee you're in a hypertrophic state because they are used for
other stuff as well As for simply, you know, adding myofibular proteins to individual muscle fibers.
So look, that's a fairly straightforward and, and relatively simple explanation how the model works.
And like you said, there's a calculator that people can access and you can quite easily plug in your
own data, like what you're following, how many sets you're doing, etcetera.
And you can actually manipulate the, the maintenance volume.
So whether you think, and you know, I'm aware that maybe a user who's going to this website for the
first time may not know, should they select three sets?
Should they select four sets for maintenance?
Should they select two days for for you know my OPS?
Should they select 40?
What are the other options?
72 hours or whatever the options are that the calculator gives you.
Yeah.
I mean, I think there's a note that says if you don't know what you're doing, then you should select
three sets for maintenance, 48 hours for the stimulus period.
I think that's, I think that's everything.
Oh and the and the volume, the Schenfelt data set for the dose response.
People ask me a lot actually why I choose the Schoenfeldt instead of the Pelan given that the Pelan
is more recent.
The reason I select the Schoenfeldt over the Pelan is because Pelan is is more recent.
That's literally the reason I don't like it is because in the diff, in the space of time between the
Schoenfeldt Metro analysis was published and the Pelan Metro analysis was published, a lot of volume
tier studies got were done, which were very high volumes.
And the risk of muscle swelling interfering with the hypertroid results in those situations is
extremely high as a result of that large number of high volume studies being done between the
Schoenfeld and the Pelham Metro analysis.
So it's not a comment on the Pelham Metro analysis or the quality thereof.
It's literally a comment on the existence of the studies that have been done between those two
dates.
And that's why I always like the the Schoenfeld better.
Yeah.
So if you're looking that you're like, well, I don't know which one's better what to use or
whatever.
Like you said, there's a default option which it sort of guides you through.
Now as long as you stick to these sort of parameters, it's relatively easy or straightforward to
use.
And you can plug in whatever split you want.
You can you can play with different workouts and you can play with a different and you can use
Schoenfelder, you can use Palen and see how they differ.
You can change the variables of of whatever maintenance volume or whatever and you can see, OK, how
does this actually influence the outcome?
But there's a few other ways that the calculator, I guess could be, could be misused or or someone
could, could incorrectly try to apply it and maybe get the wrong information out of it.
And one of those ways is, is not is per perhaps looking at it at a workout or looking at exercises
and not knowing which muscle are these exercises actually applicable for or providing stimulus to.
And so that would be an easy way for someone to look and be like, well, I don't know.
Do I count if if I'm doing bench, do I count that for triceps and for chest and, and for shoulders?
Or do I just count, you know, a direct sort of biased exercise for that muscle?
Or how do people deal with that question?
So ultimately we've got to start with what the physiologically correct answer is and then, you know,
kind of work backwards from that to find the practical point that you're happy operating at.
And the practical point that you're happy operating, happy operating at is going to differ according
to your goals and according to, you know, what you're, you know, sort of tolerances for ambiguity.
So if we start by just describing what the physiologically correct answer is and then eventually
work backwards to what the practically kind of sensible or practically appropriate answer is for
each person, I think that'll take quite a while to get to that point.
But let's, let's do the physiologically correct one first and then and work backwards.
So really what this comes back to is, you know, what is actually happening on an exercise by
exercise basis or a muscle region or even a muscle fiber by muscle fiber basis in the context of the
weakling Extemus model, in the context of a strength training program.
So essentially the fundamental principle behind my entire stimulating Rats model is that hypertrophy
and therefore atrophy are muscle fiber specific.
So you can't stimulate a muscle to grow.
This is really the great kind of delusion that 99% of the fitness industry has that they can train a
muscle.
You can't train a muscle.
It's muscle fibers that you're training.
So if a muscle fiber is not activated, it isn't going to experience transverse hypertrophy.
Yes, you can stretch it.
You can create passive tension.
Yes, you can produce some sarcomereagensis.
You cannot produce my fibrillar addition in the fiber unless you've activated it.
I feel like I see I should say that three more times because it doesn't seem like it makes any
difference.
I say it 100 times and people still run around claiming that you can train a muscle or they sneak
around it and go, Oh well, no, but I'm not training that mos fiber, but I'm still stopping it from
atrophying.
No, he can't say that.
It's the same thing.
Atrophy, hypertrophy, literally just opposite sides of the same coin.
You're either training it and it's growing or you're not training and it's shrinking.
That's it.
There is no other scenario.
So it's literally we're dealing with hypertrophy, a fiber by fiber basis.
So ultimately, every exercise that you do, even if it's training a similar region of the body, is
going to train very slightly different numbers and groups of muscle fibers in that area.
Now let me start from the very beginning and explain why that's true.
So I'm going to walk through this relatively slowly.
In any strength training or any force production movement that we do with a high level of effort or
even a maximal effort, there is still what we call a voluntary activation deficit.
Now, these voluntary activation deficits are calculated in dynamometer machines.
So a sports scientist will get people to sit in an apparatus and they'll get strapped in.
So they've got maximum stability and they'll use a very small amount of muscle mass, like a single
limb to do knee extension or elbow flexion, something like that, and the person will produce a
maximal effort in an isometric highly stable low muscle mass situation.
And even then, even then, with all those advantages, all that stability, all that minimal amount of
muscle mass, all that kind of set up, you still notice that there is some muscle fibers not being
activated.
How do we know that?
We know that because of the way the voluntary activation measurement works.
Voluntary activation measurement is not electromyography, it's a comparison of forces.
So what they do is that.
You measure the voluntary force output and then you put an electrical twitch onto the muscle as it
is producing A maximal effort.
If you get any kind of response there, then what you're finding is that of course there are muscle
fibers that weren't activated in the, you know, the kind of in the situation that was being in which
voluntary force had been generated.
So essentially the addition of extra bit of force with the electrical stimulation is telling you
that there are fibres in that area that previously weren't being used.
Now ultimately in large muscles like the glutes and the quadriceps in those situations we're seeing
10 to 15% deficits, OK.
So 10 to 15% extra force production is being, you know, not is not happening voluntarily just by a
maximum level of effort.
Now I just want to just clarify one further thing before I compare.
Contrast that with what's happening in the strength training exercise.
When we do a voluntary activation deficit test.
As I say, we're measuring the, we're trying to establish the number of fibres that is not being
activated in a situation.
It's underestimating that quite a lot.
And the reason it's underestimating it is because the only fibres that will add torque to the
dynamometer measurement are those that have leverage.
OK, so imagine that you're doing something like a, a glute medius exercise, because this is the best
example.
And it's unfortunate that it's not a muscle we tend to think of in bodybuilding, but it's a really,
really good example.
Imagine you're doing a glute medius exercise and you get a voluntary activation deficit of, I don't
know, I don't think it's ever been measured, but let's say like 8% or something like that because
it's a big muscle, but it's not as big as something like the quadriceps are.
Agree.
So you got a chunky kind of glute medius muscle or maybe it's got 7 or 8% deficit and you measure
that and you go that's interesting.
So 7 or 8% of the muscle virus in the in the entire muscle are not being activated in this maximum
hip abduction exercise.
Well, it might be a lot more than that because the glute medius has very, very distinct segments as
it wraps around the hip, and some of the fibers right at the very anterior portion probably aren't
very good at hip abduction.
They're probably really mostly good at hip internal rotation.
Conversely, the ones at the back, much more external rotators not really very good at hip abduction.
Do the same thing with a PEC when you're thinking about, you know, different planes of motion.
Ultimately, you know, if you were kind of to say to me, well, we've got a 7% activation deficit,
therefore 7% of the fibers in the glute media are not being activated, I would turn around and go,
well, what about the ones that don't have leverage?
So your your activation test can't measure that because the way it tests for the deficit is to see
how much extra force we add on torque we add on when those fibres are electrically stimulated.
And if you stimulate them and they don't produce any torque, they're not going to add to the
measurements.
So straightaway, what people don't understand is that voluntary activation deficit measurements
already underestimate, even in the perfect scenario, already underestimate the amount of fibres that
are not being activated because they ignore fibres.
The literal way the test works ignores fibers that don't have leverage for the specific action
you're doing.
And if the muscle has the ability to do multiple things, you are going to have fibers in that
scenario which just can't add force in the test that you're doing.
Yeah, it is our problem that'll effects all muscles.
There'll be some muscles that'll be more effective and that obviously you have an example there, but
are there some muscles that off the top of your head you think probably wouldn't be too impacted by
that?
Yeah, quadriceps.
I mean, when you've got a muscle, it's just super vanilla that really just does one thing.
You're going to find that probably isn't much of A deal.
I mean, you could probably argue there's different joint angle ranges of motion in which different
parts of the quadriceps will have better leverage than others, but ultimately they're all just doing
the extension.
There's nothing else going on.
The thing is, if a muscle has the ability to do more than one thing, then you're going to probably
have that issue.
A lot of people point to the biceps and go, oh, well, you know, elbow flexors, they just kind of do
this one thing.
Like not, not really.
You know, there's some really nice data showing that if you do supination, you get a very different
pattern of muscle activation from if you do elbow flexion.
Now, you can't really pin that down to one particular place across all the people you're testing.
It tends to vary between people where that activation pattern varies, but you do definitely see very
different patterns of activation according to whether you're doing supination versus elbow flexion.
So I think ultimately any muscle is capable of doing more than one thing.
Like we've talked about the glute medius, my favorite example, you know, elbow flex is generally,
That's another nice example.
Specifically.
Ultimately, yeah, the more vanilla things like maybe the triceps, the quadriceps, you're probably
going to find that that doesn't really apply, but it will absolutely apply in anything that can do
multiple things.
Okay, so some of those muscles obviously have quite large voluntary activation deficits, even if we
ignore the fact that there's some muscle fibres that aren't going to be, I guess, detected?
You'd expect that those, you'd expect those deficits would be even bigger if we were able to
incorporate that extra information regarding fibres that can't produce torque in the context of the
test.
So yeah, I'm, I'm saying that in the context of dynamometry, we are underestimating how big that
effect is.
So it can be bigger than the 10 percent, 15% that we see for the quads and the glutes in those
bigger muscles.
It tends to get smaller and smaller over the smaller muscle.
Biceps is probably the smallest muscle that we still see a voluntary activation deficit in very
clearly, but it's pretty much the smallest muscle that we train anyway in bodybuilding so.
Now a question on that.
So say we detect let's say 10% launch activation deficit.
Now you've kind of given us the answer there, but let's just make it a bit more explicit.
So does that mean that those 10% of those muscle fibers, they're never being used like it's always
the same 10% and we just don't aren't able to access those top 10% or what's it mean?
Well, that's that's the issue.
So it's, it's, it's always going to be about that kind of number of fibers that don't get used, but
they, the, the precise exercise that you do is going to change which fibers they are.
So essentially that's, that's the issue that we're facing here.
So if I do, you know, if I do a maximal effort biceps curl, I'm going to get, you know, probably a
deficit of and I'm describing this in the context of a dynamometer.
I'm going to come on and talk about strength training situation, why it's slightly different in a
minute.
But in the context of a dynamometer, if I do a maximal effort elbow flexion in a dynamometer, I'm
going to get say you know, a voluntary activation deficit of three or 4% maybe, you know, not not
very much at all, say 3%, which is great.
And it's say 3% of 5 as I'm not activating.
If I now did a maximal effort supination instead, then I would again probably have a deficit of
about 3%, maybe a bit less because I'm probably not using as much of the elbow flex complex.
So I might get it down to 1 or 2%.
But it would be different fibers that were in that one or 2% deficit in comparison with the ones
that are in the deficit previously because I'm doing a fundamentally different motion.
And according to neuro mechanical matching, I'm going to preferentially activate fibers that are
good at a thing that I want to do.
You know, it's like, I was just very staggering and people would say, oh, neuro mechanical writing
doesn't apply.
And I'm like, how can it not?
It's like all I'm saying is that all neuro mechanical matching is saying is that the body is going
to prefer to use muscle fibers that do the thing that you want to do.
It's like, what are you suggesting that we use the glute to do like elbow flexion or something?
I mean, it's like you just kind of reduce these people's arguments to the most absurd level and they
see that it just can't possibly be anything other than neuro mechanical matching.
But anyway, ultimately neurocalilizing tells us that we are going to prefer to activate the fibres
earlier if they are better at the thing that we want to do.
So you end up with your deficit in the case of reflection being one set of fibres that are probably
really good at supination and not very good at elbow reflection.
In contrast to you're doing supination, you can end up with a load of fibres that are, you know,
kind of being activated because they're good at supination.
You're not going to end up with very many fibres that are purely good at elbow flexion being
activated very early.
Therefore, they're going to be in the deficit section at the top end of the tunic pool.
There's an interesting implication there because if you think about that example of the, say, the
Bisyspache, so let's say there was a 4% voluntary activation deficit of just an alloy flexion
exercise.
Now if someone only ever did that exercise and that deficit got smaller, then essentially it's it
should be the same muscle fibers that they haven't been able to access.
And if that deficit gets smaller, they're now accessing more of those kind of top end muscle fibers
in the top end motor units.
Yeah.
Now if they changed exercises like you just said, they're actually that differs.
Now it's not about accessing mode units we haven't had access to before.
Now it's about a change in leverages.
Yeah.
So there's there's two ways I guess that we can rotate or access different mode units.
Oh yeah.
I mean like, well, over time, you know, you can, you can increase your mode unit equipment levels
and reduce your deficits and, and in smaller muscles maybe you can get most of the way there, but
the bigger muscles are not going to let you get all the way there.
It's just not going to be really.
And this is before we talk about how strength training movements differ from dynamometry.
But yeah, I mean, ultimately what we're seeing here is the importance of exercise selection in
determining, you know, which of the fibres are getting left out of the running when it comes to
producing maximal efforts, as I say, in those highly stable dynamometry tests with low levels of
muscle mass being involved.
So what I wanted to kind of now clarify is that when you go from dynamometry testing, which is where
all these voluntary activation calculations are done, when you then move across to strength training
exercises, you experience at least 2 quite important disadvantages.
You know, firstly, we're going from a situation where we are not having the same degree of
stability.
So whereas we're strapped in, in a dynamometry with maximum stability, we lose all that benefit.
We go to an unstable scenario or less stable scenario.
Stability effects motor unit recruitment on a sliding scale.
So as you go away from the highly stable dynamometry situations, you start to lose that stability.
Your voluntary deviation deficit is going to get bigger.
You're going to lose motor unit recruitment.
Similarly, if you incorporate 2 limbs instead of 1 limb straight away, bilateral force deficit
underpinned by voluntary activation differences, you're going to lose some more voluntary
activation.
You're going to get a bigger deficit.
And if you incorporate multi joint exiles on top of that, you've now got a really big voluntary
activation deficit compared to the one that you had in your dynamometry test.
So when people say, Oh, well, you know, I can do a, you know, sort of barbell overhead press and I'm
going to be activating all of the prime movers maximally.
I'm like, and what planet are you living on?
There's there's like no physical physiological reason why you would ever make that statement unless
you'd literally not done any of the reading.
You know, it's really obvious that if you go from a dynamometric situation with a highly stable
setup, you know, isometric.
So you're not worrying about any coordination issues at all.
You're not worrying about any stability issues at all.
A low level of muscle mass.
And now you try and extrapolate that voluntary activation deficit to a, you know, overhead press
with an unstable implement with multiple muscles working at the same time.
It's just going to be way bigger.
The deficit's going to be way bigger.
So ultimately we're going to experience a much bigger issue in those exercises that we're using in
the gym as a matter of course in comparison with what we're seeing in dynamometry.
So not only is dynamometry itself underestimating how many muscle fibres we're leaving on the table
because of the nature of the way the test is calculated, like I was explaining earlier.
But if we don't remember to do an adjustment for the lack of stability, the coordination issues
associated with dynamic movements, and of course the the larger amounts of muscle mass that we're
using, if we don't adjust for those, again, we're going to think our voluntary activation deficits
are much smaller than they actually are.
They're massive.
People don't realize just how big fall into activation deficits are.
So that really just underscores that when we use a different exercise, we're probably getting a very
different set of Moss fires being used, especially at the top end of the motenic pool.
If we're using that muscle or muscle group to do slightly different things, as in it could be
training a different range of motion, it could be a different plane of motion.
A lot of people forget that one.
I mean, there was an argument online just the other day people were going, oh, well, you know, a
frontal plane and a surgical plane pull down are doing the same thing.
I'm like, it's just like, in what, in what world are you living?
You know, they're doing very different things because the, the LAT has very different leverages
regionally, whether it's frontal or surgical, you know, and you, you start using the frontal plane
movement and you get mainly lumbar activation because by the time you've used all of that tub, you
haven't got a lot of capacity to use much of your thoracic region because your voluntary activation
deficit kicks in.
So how are you going to get all that activation of the thoracic region when you've already, you
know, maxed out the maxed out the lumbar region with the frontal planets?
So you just can't do that.
You know, voluntary activation deficits won't let you achieve that.
You know, so this is ultimately telling us that when we've got a set of exercises in our training
program, we can't just say, oh, I'm going to train hamstrings on Monday with the leg, the seated
leg.
I'm going to hamstrings on Wednesday with the lying leg kill.
I'm going to train hamstrings on Friday with the, you know, 45° back extension.
And somehow I'm expecting to treat that as just hamstrings exercises.
And they're all doing the same thing.
And I'm expecting the weekly estimates model to just treat those as, you know, completely identical,
you know, things for the purposes of hamstrings muscle stimulus.
And it's like physiologically that's not what's happening.
Yes, there will be a chunk of muscle fibers at the bottom end of the motor unit pool and middle of
the motor unit pool in this in the in the kind of the two joint hamstring muscles that that does
apply to.
But as you go up to the top end of the motor unit pool and you start talking about the single joint
hamstrings, it's no longer applicable.
You know, so ultimately, but in true physiological terms, the weekly nurse stimulus model actually
applies on a muscle fiber of my muscle fiber basis because hypertrophy and atrophy are muscle fiber
specific.
And I could just again say that 100 times, people just carry on ignoring me.
But you know, that is just physiologically how hypertrophy works.
You can't hypertrophy one fiber and expect another fiber to pay any attention to that.
It's just not going to.
So the best way to use the calculator would actually be exercise in a sense.
I mean, obviously there's could be some issue they.
Well, you get overlap, yeah.
I mean, the perfect scenario would be if you were only doing one exercise for a specific muscle
region or muscle group, then you could kind of do that.
But this, this is the issue.
Physiology.
Physiology is messy in in the way that we're trying to map our strength training onto Physiology.
And I think this is interesting to speculate why, why have many in the science based lifting
community started to go down the route of using, you know, single limbs, single joint, highly
specific exercises because it actually fits the Physiology, you know, and there's a whole bunch of
people who are more historically minded who are, you know, kind of railing against that and getting
upset about it because they don't like the way that that is going in a direction that is different
from theirs.
But you can see why they they're doing it because they're trying to go, how do I map what I'm doing
practically closer to the physiological reality?
Now, you may end up in a situation where you go, actually, I don't like it, it's not practical.
It doesn't work for me.
Fine, no problem.
But you've accepted that the reality is the way it works and you've not made compromises.
I've made compromises the way I train.
I mean, I do that all the time.
But it's interesting just to see when you've got a group of people who have a lot of, you know,
youth and energy on their side, they're, they're experimenting in ways to actually do start fit with
Physiology in a better way.
Yeah, yeah.
And it is like you said, it's messy because then there's other I guess layers to put on top of that
as well.
You know, like you said, you know, accessibility or time wise or, you know, for me, I was doing an
exercise yesterday in my home gym.
I was doing an overhead press in a satural pain, but I was using like a like a neutral grip bar.
And so it's too short to put on a, on a, on a rack on hooks.
So I was doing it standing and then I was thinking to myself, I'm not going to film this exercise
because I put it up.
I'm going to get people saying, why you doing it standing?
You're so much less stable.
But the payoff or the trade off, if I was to do it seated and try to leverage that weight up, that
would be way worse for me, right?
So there's always going to be sort of other not just compromises, but other components in the real
world that's going to affect some of this as well.
Totally, totally.
So where we end up then is physiologically the wickedness stimulus model is, is really thinking
about muscle fibers.
And the way we can kind of translate that to reality is by saying, well, it's going to be, you know,
regions that are Vickly directed at certain tasks like I was explaining with biceps doing supination
or biceps doing our reflection or lats doing frontal plane versus sagittal plane.
So you can kind of break it down into functional regions if you like.
I could probably mark it a course based on that idea of like all kinds of silly things floating
around, but you're basically around functional regions.
So backtracking on that the main picture already, but you can kind of sort of see that there's like
a particular purpose of certain muscle virus that are doing and some are extremely specialised and
are only really going to be activated in certain scenarios and others can be much less specialised
and kind of OK it a bunch of things.
And so you'll see those kind of behaving in slightly different ways.
But ultimately from a practical point of view, yeah, you can kind of go down the science based
lifting approach and really try and isolate, not strictly isolate, but really target preferentially
certain specific reasons by making the task as specific as possible.
I just want to make a quick comment on the Super nation thing because I can guarantee you that as
soon as someone hears this podcast, they'll go, Oh, so you're saying that when I do biceps 'cause I
should include supination as I do the curl?
I'm like no, because unless you've got a really weird shaped dumbbell, your supination is not going
to be anywhere close to maximal effort.
Which Arnold apparently you see use offset dumbbells now?
I don't know.
If you've got a really weird offset dumbbell and you can make it so that the supination action is
just as hard as the elbow.
That's a thing.
You would need to match it.
It would be quite difficult to get that you can do that.
Much easier is to do a normal elbow flex neck size and then get like a small sledgehammer and just
do rotations with the wrist with your small sledgehammer.
It doesn't actually because the leverage can be really long.
You don't need a massive.
You can just, I normally just use an empty bar like if you've got like a lat pull down bar and then
you can just adjust where you hold it.
Sledge sledgehammers with wooden handles are really comfortable for this so grip.
It's amazing to be held in that way, yeah.
It made three out.
So yeah, whereas a barbell is really uncomfortable if when you start really squeezing, it becomes
really uncomfortable.
Whereas the stage is really comfortable, sits in the hand, you can do those grip kind of rotation,
wrist kind of rotations.
There's people who are doing this exercise using cables as well.
You always obviously post some videos doing it like that.
I've not tried it out that way, but presumably it would.
Firstly, I find cables uncomfortable to do that, but then I'm kind of fussy and old and all that
kind of thing.
So.
But yeah, I mean, if people can make it work, fantastic.
So, but yeah, I mean, the point I'm making here is just simply to say that no, I'm not suggesting
that we start doing, you know, kind of dumbbell curls starting in a pronated position and rotating
through to supination because that isn't going to do anything.
Because you're not, unless you're a really weird shaped dumbbell, you're not going to be able to get
high level of force effort in the supination direction.
It's just waving your hands around while you're doing the curl.
It's not actually achieving what?
It's the same thing that people think about when I say, oh, we're going to talk about eccentric
training.
And they go, oh, so you're saying we should slow down the lowering phase and like just stop talking?
It's not doing what you think.
Yeah, it's not doing what you think it's doing.
You know, stop.
Using the words Using the words.
But in practice, that's not Yeah.
Yeah, there's there's a, there's a famous, I think it's Scott actually came up with that.
He says people, you have to watch out for word thinkers.
They think that words have have meanings outside of the concepts that they're describing.
And that's just not how reality works.
You can't from, you know, like take the words.
I mean, I'm seeing this in new mechanical matching a lot at the moment, and I'll do some videos
about this soon, but a lot of people have taken the words around new mechanical matching and they've
kind of said, oh, so this means that like, no, you're doing a word thinking exercise the concepts
beneath those words or what you need to be addressing themselves.
If you just address the words themselves, you're not interacting with the argument.
You're just trying to score points.
You know, the other people who don't understand the issue might be persuaded by you've got to
actually address the concepts that the words are describing.
And currently you're not doing that.
But yeah, word thinking is always an issue.
And it happens with eccentric phases.
It happens with things like, you know, kind of this supination issue you're describing.
It happens in other situations.
And this is not you saying that there's nothing happening with supination because again there is
value to doing supination operonation and that's going to potentially bias different parts of the
elbow effects the complex, but you're not getting those fibers in my specific.
But that what we're just saying there is you're, you're starting in a supinated position or in a
prenatal position, you're holding it in that position because that changes the leverages that the
muscles have for elbow flexion.
But I'm also saying on top of that is that you could do a supination action and that would, if you
resist it sufficiently, you will get an interesting activation pattern in the elbow flexors that
you're not going to see in a elbow flexion motion.
But just to be clear, I don't think that the data support it being something that we can name.
But again, you know, coming back to this idea of, you know, naming stuff and nomenclature, we give
names to muscles, but the body doesn't see things in the same way.
So, you know, we go, oh, this is we're going to describe, we're going to call this the biceps, you
know, kind of bracky short head.
And that's the long head.
And and then you expect to see that the brain will kind of use the short head for one purpose and
the long head for another purpose.
And it doesn't do not in everybody, it doesn't do that.
So like in some people, yeah, you might find the short head does more of supination or more of elbow
flexion or the long head might, you know, do that instead.
Alternatively, many people you actually see is that there's this certain distributional activation
within each of those heads of the Bisox Brachy.
Again, one section in both muscles does supination, another section in both muscles does elbow
flexion.
And it's like, OK, so it the brain doesn't see the individual muscles as being a definitive
description of what does what.
It just picks whatever MOTI and it does what thing.
And if it happens to crossover a boundary between two adjacent muscles in a group, then who cares?
Because the brain doesn't think in terms of muscles, it thinks in terms of MOTI units.
So we give anatomy very specific names and we expect those muscles to then follow our patterns.
It's quite arrogant really of us.
It's like the body doesn't at all.
And it's like now I'm just going to go ahead and use whatever works.
So what's the implication for this with the weak in the net stimulus?
What do you do?
If you, like you said if you were using a program that had one exercise per muscle, that'd be quite
easy.
If you're repeating that exercise multiple times a week and you just plug that into the weak in the
net stimulus.
If you were using an exercise once per week, so you're doing and say you're doing full body and
you're doing 2 sessions a week AB and you've got one chest exercise and one workout, another chest
exercise on the other workout.
So both exercises done once per week like obviously there's not a way to to correct that in the the
week in a stimulus calculator.
Let me give an example of how.
Let me give an example, an extreme example to start with, and then we'll work backwards to slightly
more graded Gray area example.
So imagine that you and a famous argument that was had a few months back and it kind of died away as
they people who are arguing about it realized it wasn't really something you could argue about is
that somebody might have been programming knee extensions on one of their four body days or one of
their lower body days and then a squat or a leg press pattern on the other day.
Now in this scenario, because the quads are actually pretty vanilla, what you could do is say that
you know, your leg press, your knee extension are mostly comparable regarding the single joint
quadriceps.
Now I would argue that there's going to be variables that affect whether that's true or not.
If you said you're doing single leg leg press and two legged knee extension, I would say they're
almost identical as far as the single joint quadriceps are concerned because your total muscle mass
is not really that different in that scenario.
So you probably are about as comparable as you're ever going to get between two exercises, at least
as far as hypertrophy is concerned.
If you want to start talking about sarcomere genesis, that's a separate question.
But which are recently stimulus does not account for.
No, but we can talk about that and you can.
You can cover it if you as long as you are ignoring any psychomagenesis caused by static stretching.
You can actually do a model for that if you want to do.
It's just that the weekly estimates model is not explicitly designed to address psychomagenesis
because in train lifters it really isn't Bigger deal.
But if you were to start with this example, when you say you have two workouts a week with sort of a
single leg leg press and a knee extension of two legs, similar muscle mass, your single leg, your
single joint quadriceps, probably getting a very similar stimulus across those two.
The erect fem is only being trained in the knee extension.
And that's a really kind of useful way, I think to model how this is working.
Because when you're then doing your analysis in your kind of the work you were doing to look at the
program, you would say RECT FEM is getting trained once a week.
Yeah.
For three sets, which is maintenance, which is nothing, and then your leg press and your Knicks
together are training your quadriceps, single joint quadriceps twice a week.
And therefore you're getting a, you know, kind of ongoing growth net stimulus across the week.
So that'll be the easiest way of doing it or seeing it.
Yeah, In that scenario, if you were to say, OK, let's do a slightly harder example, not too much
more difficult, but a slightly harder example.
Imagine I'm doing bench press in a wide grip and then on a separate day I then go to do bench press
in the narrow grip.
What's happening there with the PEC?
So in that scenario, in my wide grip bench, I'm probably hitting all three regions of the PEC.
Now I'm steering activation towards the middle region of the three external, but I'm definitely also
hitting curricula really well and coastal pretty well as well.
If I then go to clavicular, sorry, if I then go to the, the, the narrow grip, which is explicitly
designed to target the curricular more, I'm now doing a shoulder flex exercise, which is essentially
antagonist to the basic function of the coastal PEC.
So I lose 1 region in the PEC straight away.
So again, in the same scenario, if you were looking at that and going, I'm doing 2 exercises for my
bench, but I'm doing 1 narrow grip and one wide grip.
I'm going to say, OK, well, I'm going to treat my, my, my wide grip bench as being very good, but
not perfect training all three regions.
And I'm going to treat my incline benches, sorry, incline.
I mentioned my narrow grip bench, which might have an inclined if people want to do that as being
very, very good, if not perfect curricular PEC development as within the context of the exercises
that I'm doing, again, pretty good, probably external and utterly useless if not no 0 impact on cost
or PEC.
So again, that would be an example you could kind of look at from that perspective and you can just
keep going.
You could do with the opposite.
You could do with a pullover then as well of the same issue but the opposite.
You'd get sternal PEC where you weren't getting, sorry, not sternal.
You'd get coastal PEC where you were not getting anything else.
So you could kind of fill that gap as as, as, as, as regards the muscle that you weren't training.
So you can keep going in this direction and get more and more grey.
So you can go, OK, well, what happens if I'm now looking at the frontal plane versus so to plane,
you know, lat pull downs.
So now, you know, it's like a lot of people really, really resist the idea that, you know, there's
muscle fibers in the thoracic lab that aren't getting trained.
And why grid pull downs?
I'm like, you know, my friend, the existence of voluntary activation deficits mean that some muscle
fibers must get left out.
Which ones is it going to be?
They can't be the same ones.
So which ones is it going to be?
It's going to be different ones.
So you can't actually.
And again, people are ignoring the voluntary activation literature or they're trying to minimize it.
And I'm like, you know, OK, so why does the bilateral force deficit exist then if we don't have a
voluntary activation deficit that varies according to things like muscle mass usage or you know how,
you know, how are we seeing different patterns of muscle activation in maximal effort situations?
When I'm doing different things with the biceps, brachy is it is literally just ignoring Physiology.
So but yeah, lat is a great example of something that moves you even more in that grey direction we
like.
Is this, you know, am I getting anything clear cut happening here or is it just a blend?
And it's more of a blend.
I'm like, I'm losing some muscle virus, but I can't be clear about why that's happening.
It's just because of the voluntary activation deficit.
It's not because the muscle has an antagonist.
Yeah.
I think that's really helpful to start with those extreme examples because these, you know, I am
seeing some people online think that if a muscle is active, then the entire muscle is active.
And you know, obviously there's there's examples there where that's fundamentally impossible.
And you know, obviously you talk about your XM, but.
It's fundamentally impossible, full stop.
I mean, you can't fully activate the muscle.
You'd have to hook yourself up to a, you know, a machine to be able to do that.
You can't, you can't do it.
You know, unless you're talking about hand muscles.
You can't get maximum activation or anything, especially not in a strength training context.
Yeah, so the idea just, I mean, it doesn't hold water at all.
I mean, you know, I, when I saw people start to talk about this again a little bit more recently, I
thought, well, you know, based on that idea, if you think that anything that's being used is being
maximally used, like you may as well just do like a front raise.
Like that's going to be such an amazing chest exercise, shoulder exercise.
But like, how could that possibly be a good chest exercise?
You know 2/3 of the chest.
Yeah, exactly.
If you extrapolate the arguments of people who think that you can maximize their muscles in any
exercise, that if you maximally extrapolate what they're saying, you would literally only have to do
1 press, 1 pull, one like squat and one sort of hip hinge or something like that.
And you would not not need to do anything else at all.
And it's just, that is just not how bodybuilding works.
It's like, I mean, it was a.
Question.
Why would you change those?
Exactly.
But don't get me wrong though.
I mean like if somebody is doing a one press, 1 pull, one squat one, that is like a million times
better than doing nothing.
Yes, like.
Just to be clear.
Like you can go a long way with that, but you are not going to be getting up on stage looking like
anything reasonable if you just do that, you know?
I think that's just the important thing that we need to recognise.
Bodybuilding as a sport really benefits massively from exercise variety, yes.
Yeah, obviously all of this in the context of what that individual's goals are, what their needs
are.
I mean, I've made this point before.
I don't program rec framework for everyone.
You know, some people don't even want that aesthetic, so I'm not going to give it to them.
Exactly, You know, and you know, as I said at the beginning, I make compromises.
I start with knowing what I think the perfect programme would look like and then I chop like 25% of
it out because I don't want to be in the gym doing a ton of work, you know, devoting my energy to
something when I've got other things that I want to do instead.
You know, it's everyone's going to have a cut off point.
And I think what we're going to start with is start by saying, what is the Physiology?
And then you take a very, very small step back from that and go, OK, how can I make competition, you
know, bodybuilding programs that maximize the usage of that Physiology because that's, that's that's
what this is all about, isn't it?
It's like you start with Physiology and go, this is reality.
Take a small step back from that and go, this is what bodybuilding competition preparation would
ideally require.
And then you take another step back and go, OK, but for somebody who doesn't want to step on stage,
but still wants to look really, really good, you know, kind of compromise a little bit more.
And then you just keep taking additional steps until you get eventually down to someone like me
who's old and just wants to kind of maintain, which is, you know, sort of strengthen sizes.
We've we've managed to hang on to.
But the point is everyone's going to have their own point in that spectrum where they say that's the
right zone for me, but it doesn't change the way the Physiology works.
And I think I'm seeing a lot of people figure out where they want to be on that spectrum and then
try and argue that nothing else matters, which is really disingenuous.
It's like no, accept reality to start with and stop making excuses up for why you want to train in a
different way from the way that is perfect because ultimately that's what it's all about.
You've got these creators who are running around going, I train like this, I program like this.
Therefore it's the most perfect way in the world to program.
And anybody who does anything different is wrong.
And I'm like, yeah, but physiologically, what you're saying is nonsense.
You know, sure, it's a good way to train for the group of people that you're servicing as a market,
but it's a compromise from the actual physiological reality.
Yeah, Yeah.
That's a really good point.
I hope people listen to that.
And it sort of ties into what we said earlier.
You know, there's going to be other variables, sure, but we can't pretend that those other factors
and other variables are influencing the Physiology.
They're not, you know, like the Physiology is a basis and a foundation user.
And then you decide, OK, what are the things I have to give here for this particular person?
It just reminds me of the people who kind of like you said that the people who, who, who will arrive
and, and say, Oh yes, but I'm, I understand what you're saying about new mechanical matching or
understand what you're saying about exercises selection, but I don't like those exercises.
I like these exercises which are more motivating to me.
And I think that being more motivating to me is going to make them better.
And I'm like, it will give you a higher recruitment level.
Yes, it will.
And if it helps you with adherence and going to the gym, fantastic.
And if that's your compromise solution, great, I'm happy for you.
But you can't make a glute exercise.
Do you know, kind of biceps work?
And if you just keep starting from that ridiculous example and just kind of step by step by step
work your way through the chain, you'll find that again, you can't make a squat train the wreck
femme you can't make.
And you know, kind of the bits of the biceps that do our reflection do supination.
You can't make the bits of the lats that do frontal plain work do sagittal plain work.
They're just not doing going to do that, no matter how much you are motivated.
Do those other exercises.
You can love curls all you want, but it's not going to work equally.
Exactly.
And you just kind of start with the absurd example and work your way down to the more Gray area
examples and you'll see how this works.
It's just harder to see the closer you get to the mossifiers being, you know, similar to each other
in function rather than further away from each other in function.
So yeah, I mean, like, as I say, somebody has a program that they're really motivated to follow.
I'm not criticizing them.
I'm not suggesting that they stop doing that.
All I'm saying is, you know, just try and let go of your ego and accept that reality isn't perfect,
or at least it doesn't map perfectly onto the thing that you're doing.
And there may be better solutions out there for people who are more motivated than you to succeed in
the goal rather than just enjoy themselves in the gym.
Yeah, yeah.
It's OK that someone's choosing to do something which is, which is not physiologically perfect.
Totally, absolutely.
I mean, this is the crazy thing.
It's like what happens is the the I think in the fitness industry, creators blend those two
questions together.
They're always trying to say, you know, what I want to do has to be physiologically perfect.
And they're never able to separate those two things apart and go, I am not.
I'm choosing not to program in a way that is.
It's almost like they can't be intellectually honest.
It's like what they should do really if they want to be, if they wanted to be intellectually honest,
is to say, yes, Physiology works like this.
No, I don't recommend training in a way that Max exercises that Physiology or physiological reality
because of these reasons.
And I think these compromises because they help with adherence, they help with enjoyment.
They mean I'm not in the gym for three hours a day.
And all these are the benefits that they have identified probably validly.
And they could mark it on that basis and they would actually then be coherent and consistent with
Physiology.
And then they wouldn't have to spend, you know, a lot of time getting all upset and, you know, kind
of arguing with people on social media about how, how the Physiology works when they haven't read
enough studies to actually understand it in the first place.
Yeah, yeah.
I think that's a really interesting thing there to actually identify.
This is why I'm not doing what's perfect, you know, and, and sometimes I explain that to my groups
because sometimes I will program stuff that's not perfect.
And an example here might be that, you know, recently in one of our last phases, I gave people a
drop set and I gave them so a single set, a set of, of about 5:00 and then about 30 seconds off,
reduce the weight by about 20% and try to match those repetitions, a second set of five.
And I was up front and said, hey, this is not perfect.
This is not going to be as stimulating as just taking two or three minutes off and doing a second
set.
But this allows us to get, you know, a high amount of exercise selection done in about 50 to 60
minutes.
If we didn't do that, it'll take us, you know, 708090 minutes to just do the same thing.
And a lot of people in that group didn't have time to do that.
So This is why I'm making that compromise is a physiologically perfect no, But I've made the
smallest compromise I think I can make to achieve this other purpose.
So I actually think that's it.
That's quite an interesting conversation for people to have.
Absolutely.
And, and the silly thing is that a lot of the creators out there at the moment who are burning time,
energy and, and credibility on arguing about physiological stuff that they don't really understand,
they could actually provide enormous amounts of value by going down that road.
Instead of, you know, some of my favorite creators, and many of them have actually been through the
mentorship program before and they've gone on and built on the knowledge that they've gathered
through that process.
And they've gone on and a lot of them now primarily help people solve practical issues associated
with these companies, like exactly the way you described.
And they make compromises and they go, this is how it works.
But I'm doing this because of these practical reasons.
And I think that's fantastic to see.
And I really enjoy, you know, looking at what they're, what they're doing, what they're creating in
that respect.
There's a number of ways that people can actually add value, I think in the industry and they're as
creators rather than trying to compete with me, which is just really, really silly.
You know, I mean, honestly, it's really silly because I've been doing this a very, very long time
and I read a lot more studies than.
Pretty much anybody else out there, if not everybody else out there.
So this is not going to happen if they think they're going to compete with me on that.
But they could actually do some really interesting stuff that doesn't compete with me.
And I'm not asking people not to compete with that.
I just find it quite funny.
But you know, just for their sake, I think it'll be interesting for them to consider that.
Yeah, I think it would add more value as well.
You know, there's a quote, I think maybe Oscar Mirror.
I think it was him and he talks about this idea that he he doesn't want to be anti anyone like the
the his, his mission is to be showing sort of a, a new option of what's better.
And I think as soon as we get caught up being anti people and trying to take down someone and trying
to compete for the sake of competing, it lessens or reduces the ability for us to actually be
putting out something that's creative and constructive and, and, you know, a better narrative or a
better idea for people.
And, you know, if people are simply focused on, hey, how do I take down this individual?
It's like, well, you're just robbing yourself and your audience of potentially.
Adding value in this particular instance, it's a full errant anyway.
I mean, I really don't see what they're going to make of it.
But you know, everyone's got their own choices to make.
But it's just, as I say, I think there's, there's a, there's a, an interesting, you know, ego trap
here where people are falling into this belief that they feel like their way of training has to be
physiologically perfect in order for it to have value.
And it doesn't.
Yeah.
I love, I love seeing people say stuff like, I choose to do this because it's not because it's the
most physiologically perfect thing, but because I enjoy or it works because of X or whatever.
I find those conversations so refreshing.
And do you know what it allows?
It allows people like, so you know, we would look at the weekly net stimulus and say, well, anyone
who plays with it is going to see there's one clear outcome here of what seems to be best on paper.
It's there's no two ways about it.
And it allows us to have a conversation.
Hey, if you don't want to train like that, that's great.
You've told me why and that's that's cool, that's fine.
You know, I have no issue with anyone doing.
That I've said before there's times where I would do 2 full body sessions a week.
Yeah.
Now is that that's miles away and and my exercise selection is probably pretty thin.
Yeah.
Is that miles away from what the many in the science based lifting community are doing with, you
know, you know, dozens of exercises and, you know, training every other day and all that kind of
thing.
And it's just because my requirements are different from theirs.
I have a lower priority invested in those outcomes, got all the stuff I want to do and it's not as
important to me to achieve the things that they want to achieve.
So again, it's like if we could, if people were able to get out of the ego trap and stop having to
argue that their program has to be the most physiologically perfect program, and instead go, my
program solves this, this, this or my program solve this problem for this group of people, you know
who have these requirements.
And these are the compromises I'd like to make to make that work for them.
The Physiology says this, but we do these things because it makes their life easier.
It makes it easy to adhere to the program.
You know, we can get in and out of the gym more quickly, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah.
Then fantastic.
You know, everyone's happy.
No one's arguing, you know, But I think there's this ego trap at the moment where everyone is
heavily invested in making sure that they can turn to the camera and say, you know, my way of
programming is perfect.
And therefore, you know, it has to agree with Physiology and then they end up twisting the
Physiology to fit the programming rather than the other way around.
And that's what we're seeing happening a lot.
People are going, you know, oh, well, you know, muscles don't atrophy between workouts or this
clearly got the maintenance they're showing.
Oh, no, you know, the the squat trains, the rec fan when you've clearly got data showing that it
doesn't, although, oh, there's no difference between the lat pull downs in the front to play and the
side of the plane when you've got, you know, three EMG studies and a bunch of moment arm studies
showing that they do.
And it's just like, you know, they're literally just saying that because they want to defend their
way of programming.
It's like, no, just come on.
A bit of intellectual honesty.
Get out of the ego trap.
And you'd actually find that you won't be in a situation where you've got people yelling at you
online because you're, you know, kind of saying things blatantly not true.
And then they turn around and whine to the camera that, you know, social media is a toxic place.
I'm like, well, yeah, but you contributed, didn't you?
It would be an interesting activity for someone to do is sit down and reflect on why have I chosen a
program this way because if you.
I don't.
Introspection comes naturally to a lot of creative.
Well, here's someone's invitation to do so.
Because if, if someone is selecting to, to program in a way because they've got an emotional
attachment to it or you know, for whatever these other factors are, again, we're not saying that's
wrong, but see if you can identify what they are.
I'm laughing because I'm laughing because this is, this is a really wonderful kind of illustration
of how behind the behind the scenes, Jake is the optimist about human nature.
And I'm the person.
So Jake is always like, yeah, but people will be good and they'll do these things and it'll all be
wonderful.
I'm like, are you joking?
Are you doing on the same planet?
I found this process helpful for me when I was programming and I was going through some of this
content because there's ways that I enjoy training.
And what I found was I was able to make some compromises when I was like, I'm getting rid of this
stuff that I cannot justify physiologically.
There's this stuff which doesn't make perfect sense, but it doesn't really violate it too badly and
I enjoy it.
And it was, it allowed me to kind of bridge the gap initially because what I always thought I
enjoyed is not at all what made sense physiologically.
Like now that I understand the Physiology, right?
So I think it's a valuable experience to have for me and maybe for some others.
And you can you can disagree with me on that.
One, I'm not disagreeing with you, it's valuable.
I'm just disagreeing with with you that many people will pay any attention to you whatsoever.
But that's probably enough preaching for today.
I think we've we've gone way off the end of our our remit here on this podcast.
Well, I, I do actually still have one or two questions.
So one was one's an observation I suppose.
And for anyone who does go and play with the weekly net stimulus calculator, you will see if you
were to plug in, say, some of the silver area plans we've talked about, what you will notice is they
kind of match up pretty much perfectly with what seems to be the best outcome in the calculator.
And that, you know, that was, I guess, a huge motivation behind us even doing this podcast in the
1st place.
And obviously, one feature you will see in those programs is that they do repeat the same exercises.
And so that combats this whole issue we've been talking about today in terms of muscle fiber
specificity.
So one point I wanted to make there.
Now a question.
Also also, rather than adding extra sets of the same exercise, they would be much more likely to add
a different exercise for the same muscles.
So again, you would be playing directly into that line of muscle fibre, hypertrophy being a specific
phenomenon to each fibre.
So not it's not just about the same exercise as three times a week, it's about the fact that even on
the volume side of things, rather than adding more sets, they would always, almost always add extra
exercises instead.
I think it's really cool.
Yes, yeah, yeah.
We obviously see this sort of epic cap to set number.
Generally that sort of third set is, is where most people would cap it, which again, if you look at
the the volume, I don't know if on the calculator you'd have to put select like one set two set
threes and compare the different numbers it gives you.
But you'll see that obviously we've got this diminishing returns in terms of set volume.
And arguably that, you know, second or third set is, is maybe beyond that, you're not really getting
much more really from a set by set basis.
Now the question I wanted to ask is people who do go and play with this calculator and they, they
get these arbitrary units of hypertrophy at the end of it, they're going to say, well, hang on.
If I put this in and it gives me, I forget what numbers are in normal, let's say 4I I forget now
it's been a while since I've looked at it, but let's say you give me 4 units over the week and I put
this workout in and it gives me two units.
Why would I not be growing double the amount of muscle or double the pace in this first workout?
And it doesn't work like that, but why?
Can you explain that?
Yeah.
So ultimately it's because we're using disparate data from different sources to combine to create a
model that gives us an idea of what's going on.
And those data sources are never really designed or intended to be used together in that way.
So, you know, while I've tried to mitigate that by sticking with set effects, so when you look at
the volume literature, those response literature, you're always talking about what does one set do?
What does 2 sets do?
What does three sets do?
And then you look at the maintenance literature and you go, you know, 3 or 4 sets once per week.
How much hypertrophy is stimulated by three or four sets once per week?
And then you kind of work.
So it's all based on what a set is capable of doing.
Even so those, you know, data sources weren't ever really designed to be clicked together.
And you always can have a little bit of kind of disjointedness when you when you combine them.
So for me, the weekly estimates model is designed to give you a directional indication of whether
something is better than something else.
I don't think it's going to give you a quantitative.
Well, it is literally, I mean, by definition it's giving you a quantitative answer because it's
giving you a number.
But I think when you're comparing stuff, it is ranking, It's giving you a ranking of outputs.
I don't think I would interpret those as magnitude, you know, of effect.
It's just saying if you have to work out someone has a higher ranking than the other, then that
one's going to be the other one.
So I'd see it as a ranking effect rather than a magnitude effect.
But you're absolutely right.
If you put sort of like body parts bits in the program, you get nonsense out because it gives you,
you know, like 1/2 a stimulating Rep per week, not half a simulation Rep per week, half an hour per
unit per week.
Whereas if you put the same kind of exercises in and sets and reps in for full body, it'll give you
like, you know, four or five arbitrary units a week and it'd be 10 times better.
And that's definitely true.
Even if you're the body part split probably has horrible muscle swelling going on, you know, I
probably still isn't, you know, 10% of the effect of a full body program.
So it's a ranking effect.
It's not a magnitude effect.
So, you know, of course some people are going to go, OK, we can create our window because it doesn't
do what I wanted it to do.
Well, OK, fine.
But it's doing what I wanted to do, which is rank programs in order of of effectiveness, which it
does really well.
Yeah, yeah.
I mean, that's essentially what a model is doing, isn't it?
Like it's not a perfect representation of reality which is.
The magnitude based effect is not telling you how big the effect is, it's telling you how different
the programs are.
So is it ranking them in order?
And it does that using a quantitative method.
But you know, that quantitative, that number that it gives you isn't an indication of how much
hypertrophy is happening.
It's just an indication of whether one program is better than another.
It's a ranking effect.
So you find that three times a week is better than two and two times a week is better than one.
And you know, which is exactly what the long term data say.
We did a whole episode on training frequency, you know, and explain why that data pretty much have
to be consistent with the explanation that higher frequencies are better than lower frequencies.
But and ultimately the weekliness stimulus model gives you that answer without being told to, which
I think is really cool.
So the really thing I think I like most about the weekliness stimulus model is that you start with
three sources of data, which are or three assumptions which are really difficult to argue with.
You know, it's really difficult to argue with the dose response of Hypertrian workout by workout
basis.
And we've got a physiological explanation for why it's nonlinear, and we've got numerical training
data showing that it's nonlinear.
You then pull that next to the maintenance literature, which again, is impossible to argue with,
shows you you've got atrophy happening within a week.
And you put that next to the stimulus period duration, which you can argue a little bit with, but
it's, you know, probably a ballpark figure 36 to 48 hours.
And you put those three pieces of information in the model and it spits out the answer, which just
so happens to be exactly the way that silver era bodybuilders have always trained, which is
extraordinarily coincidental.
And it also kind of fits with us, say, the interpretation that we can get from long term frequency
studies, which again, you know, ranking order 3 is better than two, 2 is better than one.
And so you put all of that together and you're like, this is fairly straightforward.
It's just all nicely kind of a line.
So that's probably about as good as we can do at the moment.
You know, yeah, we'd have better data, but we just don't have it.
And obviously the podcasts we've done over the last few weeks, we've talked about, you know, sleep
deprivation and, and stress and calorie deficit and these things that will influence that end number
in their calculator.
It won't necessarily influence which, you know, which option or which split or whatever is going to
be the most effective option there.
But obviously all those things will play into, you know, potentially the stimulus period or the
atrophy period or all those kind of variables as well.
And you know, again, one we haven't really talked about in detail yet is anabolics, and that will
influence some of that as well.
Then then for example, maybe the maintenance stuff, but it's not going to necessarily change which
situation or scenario is going to be the most effective still on paper.
Yeah, that's probably a conversation for another day.
I, I, I do think that glucocorticoids especially probably just create a background problem effect.
I don't think they change how we approach training that much.
You might want to change recovery because it would change recovery.
You might want to change volumes a little bit.
Well.
Let me ask you this.
Is there any scenario you can think of?
So at the moment, if you had no other sort of existing issues and you went to the model or the
calculator, what it's going to come out with is ultimately full body every other day or three times
a week is going to be superior.
Is there a scenario you can think of?
No, no, no, no, no.
There's no, there's nothing that I can think of out.
There's nothing I can think of that would change the the ideal training program that would be that
would create the best output.
You might find that you have more constraints and what you can put into the model in the 1st place,
which I think is probably going to be the conversation for next week with anabolics.
But I don't think anything would change how the body responds to the stimulus side of things.
As I say, we do record to chords.
You might find that you have to limit the data in terms of how many sets you can recover from per
workout.
So you're limiting what data you can put in, but the out the model itself won't change.
And I think the same thing applies to anabolics.
Actually.
We might find we limit what data you're allowed to put in and still remain healthy, but I don't
think you can that you know simply, I don't think it's going to change the output or the model gives
you.
No, I don't.
Yeah, well, that's a conversation for next week.
The training stimulus does sit parallel to all of this other stuff.
So what the training is doing in terms of stimulus is sitting parallel to both glucocorticoid and
anabolic, you know, hormone effects.
So I don't think it changes anything on that score.
It just changed what we can put in in the 1st place, I think, Yeah.
Okay, so people where can they find this?
So if they if you just jump on Google and you Google weekly net stimulus calculator, I think it will
probably come.
Up.
Yeah, I mean, I have a pinned post on my Instagram and there is a link in my bio to the calculator.
So if you've found me on Instagram, then you've found the weekly Next Two Minutes model.
Perfect.
Well, thank you everyone for joining us for another episode and I hope you'll join us again next
week as we probably talk about Anabolics, which will be a fun conversation.
So join us and thank you as always.