Episode: 032 Common training mistakes to avoid in 2026
URL: https://open.spotify.com/episode/6iqWg4n9JWR8VbGrztym22
Published: 2025-12-28
================================================================================

Hello everybody.
Thank you for joining us again for another episode of Hypertrophy past and present coming up to the
end of the year.
And this must be, oh, episode 35, something like that.
So we, yeah, Chris is looking shocked.
Yeah, it's been feels like just last week that we started, but it's been a big year.
And thank you for you guys who've been with us since the beginning.
So we decided that since it's the end of the year, we're going to do a bit of a topical episode
today and we're going to talk about kind of what people might be doing next year, next week when
they get into the gym.
Maybe they've had a bit of time off.
Obviously, a lot of people have had, you know, different holidays and stuff at the moment where
maybe they've fallen out of routine and maybe some people are going to make some New Year's
resolutions to actually, you know, get into the gym for the first time next week.
And so we're gonna talk a little bit about maybe some ways to do it well, or at the very least some
mistakes to avoid when you do it, and some mistakes that we both have seen in the gyms that we're
part of and with clients and just what we've seen in the industry over the years.
So that's gonna be where this conversation's gonna go.
And look, to be honest, I don't know exactly where the conversation's gonna go.
And it's gonna be a bit of fun.
But we also wanna follow it up next week with a Part 2.
And we're gonna talk about, especially for you guys who are coaches or PTS personal trainers, how
you can effectively structure routines for clients next year.
And you can deliver what clients maybe want or think that they want, but do so in an effective
manner.
Now, if that doesn't make sense to you, you will next week when we talk about it.
But that's been something that has been a challenge for me over the years in Del in finding a middle
ground of what I know a client needs and what it is that they think that they need or at least that
they want.
And so I'm excited for that conversation.
Now before we jump in today's conversation, obviously I've got a a plan to talk about.
But before I do all of that, I am not alone.
I do have a Co host with me.
Yes.
How are you doing today?
I did start to think I was being forgotten.
I'm just here to kind of wave at you and direct conversation.
Actually stressing and thumbs up and you're just like wing man.
I'm doing fine.
Thank you.
Yes, very well.
OK, great.
So I've got a silly area plan to talk about today, one that we thought would contrast nicely to some
of the mistakes we're about to talk about in a moment.
So here we have, and this is coming from a magazine from 1952.
So we've talked about anabolics recently.
I think last week we talked about anabolics and obviously we discussed it when they sort of were
widely being used in bodybuilding was the early 60s.
You know, any time from sort of 1954 onwards they were being experimented with.
And so this was a a routine that was published in a magazine in 1952.
So presumably before anabolics were being used by sort of any bodybuilders in America.
And this routine was what George Eiferman referred to as his favorite routine.
So George Eiferman obviously very, you know, significant silver area bodybuilder.
He won both Mr. Universe and also Mr. America competitions.
He won Miss America in the late 40s, I think 48.
And then he continued competing actually for quite a long time.
I think he's Mr. Universe win was in the early 60s.
So he was active in competing for, yeah, I mean close to two decades.
And the plan like I said is, is coming from 1952.
So we can be fairly confident that this was a plan he was following when he was natural.
There's no evidence that I'm aware of that he did in fact use any anabolics.
But obviously since he was competing in the 60s, it's hard to know that for sure.
So we are back to a full body plan.
Last week, obviously with our golden era example we had, what did we have?
Was it a S?
It was, I think it was a six day a week plan.
It was a weird spit, wasn't it?
I'm just remembering now is Oh no, I'm getting confused.
Actually, we talked about Mike Mensa last week.
You you know what, for a enhanced plan, it was actually quite good.
I reflected on that this week.
Actually, Chris, I didn't tell you about this, but I've actually been been enthused to write a
immense inspired revamped plan.
I know you're shaking your head at me, but as much as it may, this may ask, not everyone will train
full body.
And so for those who want who won't, I want to provide the lesser of two evils.
And I think immensely inspired plan might get us there.
Anyway, before I lose you completely, let me talk to you about this silver era full body plans.
George Eiferman Chris is about to leave.
I'm going to do this podcast.
So I have a feeling.
So George Eiferman, we have full body three times per week, as was huge.
Obviously, almost every single silver area bodybuilder was doing that full body three times a week.
That's just a norm.
Don't listen to anyone who tries to tell you otherwise, because it's simply not true.
And we had three sets per exercise.
Every exercise was following the same structure.
Three sets, 7 to 10 reetitions, double rogressive method.
And we start with a hat squat.
Now, when I say hat squat, I do not mean a machine, I mean a barbell hack squat.
So if you haven't done this exercise, it's where generally you would have your heels elevated.
You don't need to, but usually heels elevated, you have a barbell behind you.
Imagine like a deadlift, but with the bar behind you instead of in front of you.
So yeah, the bar is kind of falling directly down behind your back and behind your legs and you're
squatting down with it.
So starting with a hack squat and then we go into a barbell bench press, then into a dumbbell fly,
which they didn't call flies at that point, they called them bent arm laterals, but for all intents
and purposes, it was a fly.
And then a dumbbell lateral raise, a standing alternating dumbbell shoulder press.
And this was done in the sagittal plane.
So interesting exercise selection that I don't think we've seen a lot of in plans previously.
And then we have a bent over one arm dumbbell row.
Now this was actually done in the transverse pane.
So if you imagine bending over dumbbell, we're not pulling up elbow kind of, you know, close to our
torso.
We're actually pulling elbow directly out to the side and then into a standing barbell curl and then
a dumbbell concentration curl and then wrist curls.
We didn't see a lot of wrist work.
I mean, some, I guess some of the Hoffman's guys did do this.
But here we have Eichmann doing a seated dumbbell wrist curl.
Now I believe he did high repetitions with this.
I didn't have it noted down here, but I think from memory he did.
And he did sort of talk about the purpose of this exercise was to make other exercises easier.
So he he thought it sort of made his grip more effective and easier to handle other weights.
And then he went into dumbbell side bends.
Now with this, he was actually holding awake overhead when he was doing the side bends and then
concluded with sit ups.
Now that's 11 exercises in total.
Obviously we've got a couple of, you know, non conventional exercises towards the end with the side
bends and wrist exercise.
But there we have what's that 3033 sets in total full body?
Wow.
Yeah, well, that's some work.
I don't think anybody's going to be surprised by my kind of complaints at this point.
I mean, I'm just going to say the same things that I've said many times before.
I mean, we were actually talking about that before we jumped on the podcast today.
This doesn't seem to be very much hamstrings work in general across most of these programs.
So, you know, straight away I'm not seeing any hamstrings work there.
There's no, I mean, obviously there's no machines potentially available to do the kind of classic
leg curl type exercise that we would want.
But you know, even then there's no, there's no kind of deadlift variation in there.
And you know, following on from that, there's very little, you know, lat work.
I mean, arguably there's no lat work in there because the row is out to the side and there's no,
there isn't even an isometric with the deadlift variation.
So I'm really, really struggling for lats and I don't understand why that is.
There's something weird going on.
I mean, I wouldn't be surprised if like in, you know, sort of year's time somebody goes, oh, well,
didn't you know that all bodybuilders used to do pull ups as part of their warm up?
They just didn't tell you.
Yeah.
It's one of those things is like you can just imagine them kind of realizing, oh, we forgot to tell
you.
We'd just because.
Everyone knew.
Everyone knew, but yeah, there's no, there's no kind of, there's no kind of lat work in there, which
is really disappointing.
So yeah, hamstrings last.
Nothing there.
And then as you, you know, mentioned to me when you're telling me about the program we're going to
do, you know, there could have been some direct triceps work and it's strict that there isn't direct
triceps work in there given that there is so much direct biceps work.
So again, some weirdness there.
Having said that, I really like the way that we've got frontal plane and sagittal plane pressing.
So you get that really nice kind of balance between the the lateral and and anterior doubt.
And just by the by, I don't know if you have a mental image of what Eichmann looked like in your
mind, but he had great developed chest and shoulders and arms.
You know, we're obviously not bad either.
Biceps were quite well developed.
But certainly I would say that the sort of high point of his seat, of his physique was his chest and
shoulders, which kind of checks out with his program.
Yeah, that's what this program is doing, I think.
You know, I think the the sort of bench, I mean, to be honest, bench plus dumbbell fly for me would
be a bit too much, you know, but maybe he was a sort of an adult or a tricep dominant bencher.
So I mean, you know, I'm not saying that is not possible to do three sets of bench followed by three
sets of flies.
If I could do that because my involved in a bench press, but I think it's it's, it's probably not
going to work for some people it's.
Definitely your point with that.
Obviously I see me referring more around like damage and volume, but in terms of exercise as well,
what are those two from a chess perspective?
What are those two exercises doing differently or not doing differently, just so people are aware?
Well, it depends on how the bench is performed.
It depends on who's doing the bench.
If you've got someone who's a chest dominant bencher and you're in the definitively in the
transverse plane, you know you're a wide grip bench, then really the, the, the kind of the, the
regional activation will be almost identical between the, the, the, the dumbbell fly and the bench
press.
What you'll get is a little bit of a higher level of activation in the fly simply because you're
using a smaller amount of total muscle mass.
So it allows you to recruit more motives in the target muscles, but regionally you'll be basically
getting more or less the same output.
So if you're using a wide grip for the bench, effectively there's just not really any scenario where
the bench is giving you anything for chest that the fly is not giving you.
Exactly.
Whereas you know, obviously the bench is going to do other stuff as well, you know, on top of that,
especially with, you know, the triceps.
So that's why I always say it's like it depends on your plane of motion.
You start to bring the the bench press into a more sagittal plane range of motion.
If you're tucking your kind of elbows and you're trying to make it more sagittal plane, you get
obviously a different sort of focus.
It becomes a much more clavicular exercise.
You don't get any of the cost or PEC at all.
So you kind of really change the way that the PEC is working in that scenario.
But again, you know, a person who is not just dominant at all, like I'm not, they're going to find
that it becomes a very much triceps exercise in that scenario.
So the bench press I think is one of those scenarios.
We have to be a little bit aware that how you do the exercise and what type of, you know, leverages
you've got is going to start moving the effect of the exercise around a bit.
I think the dumbbell flies a little bit more kind of precise.
You know, obviously a machine will be even better in that regard.
What's interesting with the bench in this situation, assuming he's using a wider grip and you know,
it doesn't say close grip, so I'd imagine he is then in fact, what would make this the most
effective?
What what would give the bench the most efficacy possible would actually be if he was not chest
dominant in his benching, because if he was chest dominant, he's getting the same as the flies, but
less exactly, Exactly.
And it's interesting because someone would look at this and be like, oh, you know, I'm only going to
use a bench if I'm chest dominant.
Well, actually that's going to give you the least return on investment in this situation.
Yeah, for me, this would work fine because that wouldn't be very much chest at all in that bench
press and there's no other triceps exercise.
For me that bench would be mostly a triceps.
Yes, which is what you would want in this situation.
Which is what I would want in that situation.
With the overhead so the the standing alternating dumbbell shoulder press done in the sagittal plane
is 1 likely to get much or any upper chest in this.
Yeah, I guess I mean that sagittal plane really does call the clavicular pack into the movement.
And obviously the peak external momentum length is at 90°, which is, you know, kind of where the
clavicular pack is handing over to the anterior deltoid, if you kind of phrase it that way.
So, yeah, I mean, I think it's it's it's definitely getting some some involvement there.
So just as we conclude with this, what did we, what do you think was done well here?
What is good if we wanted to emulate this in a plan today?
Well, straightaway, I think the, the, the adult work is, is definitely exemplary and it's something
that we don't, we have seen before in other programs of this nature.
We don't tend to see so much today, you know, because a lot of overhead pressing is done on machines
and those machines kind of tend to be scapular plane really.
And so they're kind of neither one thing nor the other.
If they are in a plane, it's generally kind of frontal plane where they're sort of either side of
the head.
I actually are quite excited when I go to the gym and I see that there's a proper size to play and
pressing possibility.
It's kind of like, oh, spot, because I can start to make use to that.
And when people use dumbbells to do their pressing, they don't tend to do them in this way that
we've seen described here.
They almost always do that.
I very, very rarely see anyone do that.
And if they do do it, they're so weak that they don't want to do it because they feel like it must
be inferior because how much less weight they're using.
I've been.
Using one of those, I mean, that's the that's the whole kind of worms really right there.
I mean, I think yeah, there.
Is obviously something you're not.
Saying no, there's an issue there.
The reason there's an issue there is because a lot of the time I think we need to not it.
I think a lot of the time it's unhelpful to focus on the amount of weight that's being used in an
exercise.
Oh, absolutely.
My point is that people assume that the weight matters.
Yeah.
But equally there are other people running around thinking that if the exercise requires a small
weight, that's also helpful.
So and they're trying to increase the moment arm.
So like people like, oh, well, if I do a lateral raise, I only can only use this tiny dumbbell to do
this exercise.
And therefore it must be really I'm like, no, hang on a minute.
The instability you're creating there is causing the problem.
So I think this is one of those things where the weight is almost irrelevant.
It's like go back to basics and figure out why it is that the exercise is, you know, kind of
requiring a small weight.
Is it because you're creating a gigantic lever and therefore it's probably quite unstable?
Or is it because, you know, the muscle that you're using is underdeveloped and that's actually a
good sign?
It means that you've got a lot of capacity to improve, which is probably the case here.
So it's almost when I say the weight is.
Relevant.
It's also that you're using less muscle mass, right?
Like, you're not going to be using again when you're.
Using.
Yeah, exactly.
So are there good reasons for using less weight or are there bad reasons for using that?
That's that.
That's the, that was the thing that was making me chuckle.
It was the fact that it's almost impossible to just kind of say, oh, the amount of weight I'm using
is telling me something.
No, it's not.
It's the thing that comes before that that determines why it is that you're using less weight.
That's the interesting bit.
Yeah, yeah, on this exercise I was going to say I've been using, I don't know if they called, is it
a Swiss bar of what do they call it?
A football bar?
I figure what they're called now where it's a barbell that has like neutral handles, neutral grip
handles.
So I've been using like a close grip, neutral grip barbell essentially and doing sagittal overhead
with that.
I love it.
It's so good.
I wish I'd been doing this.
So now it's such a great exercise.
Yeah, I don't see those bars very often actually in the gyms that I've frequented, but I know what
you mean.
I've I've seen them in the past, but I think they've fallen slightly out of favour.
But no, that's, no, that's a really interesting possibility.
So, yeah, in terms of stuff that's good.
Yeah, I think the yeah, the the the adult work definitely jumps out at me.
I can't say very much else positive.
I don't think I really.
Don't I?
Mean, yeah, sure, three times a week and three sets.
And did you mention that it's 7 to 10 reps?
7 to 10, Yeah, I think I did say that.
I mean, which is, you know, a nice Rep range.
I mean, what I would describe as moderately heavy in that sort of lower half of the of the moderate
Rep range, which is great.
It's, you know, generally requires very little warm up to do.
You can, you know, kind of jump from one exercise to the other.
But he's doing three sets.
I mean, he's doing a lot of work.
I mean, total workload I think is top P.
But you know, some of that exercise selection is fluff.
I mean, some of it's tough.
I mean, he's got squats and bench in there.
I mean, that's a lot, but a lot to the others.
I mean, concentration, curls, wrist curls, side bends, sit ups.
I mean, come on, I mean.
Exercise 8 onwards, it's a bit fluff, right?
So one to seven.
So we've got what 21 sets of good quality work in there.
Some of it's not going to be that demanding that today's.
Bent over row in the transverse plane.
I'm not a fan of either.
I mean, I've.
Been doing, I haven't been doing that exercise, but I've been doing a single like a cable single arm
row in the transverse plane.
And that feels the way I've been doing it is you can actually stabilize yourself, like wedge
yourself into the cable setup.
So I'm fully sandwiched in it.
I couldn't be more stable if I tried and doing it like that, and I've been finding that a really
nice feeling exercise.
Interesting.
You mean disapproving?
No, not disapprovingly, Skeptically, Skeptically.
That's my I'll.
Film it, I'm filming a post it and you can see see what you think of it.
Is.
I think it's, I think every time I've tried to do rows in the transverse plane, I've kind of just
caught myself thinking, why am I not just doing a rear delt fly at this point, especially when I try
and do some anything single arm, I'm like, just why am I not just doing rear delt fly?
Because that would be so much more kind of, you know, appropriate for what I'm trying to achieve.
As soon as I start bringing in kind of biceps movement, elbow movement, I'm like, what am I adding
here?
What what's the purpose of this?
What's he doing?
I guess it'd be if you were trying to get some trap in there as well.
I bet you're trolling me at this point.
I mean, you know, some trap.
I mean, OK, some some some vibers of the traps Yeah, sure.
But again, are we getting very?
There's not, there's not a lot of trap work in this.
I mean, this is that exercise could do a lot of heavy lifting in this routine.
It's giving us all the back development.
It's horrid.
It's really horrid.
We don't even have a deadlift.
Well, yeah, so I mean, but this is this is one of those situations where, you know, for people who
may be coming to this episode, you know, cold and going, why are these guys describing this routine
and hating on it when they're supposed to be kind of promoting silver air routines?
It's because we've done all of the good ones.
I've got some good ones up my sleeve, people we've talked about in the past, and you'd be like Oh my
God, here we go again. 6 Planned for Ridge Park OR.
Exact else, we've covered some really, really good silver area routines.
We're kind of like now starting to cover stuff that's, you know, a little bit fringe compared to the
stuff that we've done before.
Yes, there's some really, really big issues with this particular program, but fundamentally it's
still, as you said, three times a week.
We're still looking at, you know, kind of three exercises, sorry, three sets, you know, is the kind
of top end volume, moderately heavy reps There's a lot of stuff, you know, full body.
It's a lot of stuff that is fundamental about this routine that we've covered before.
We're just kind of arguing about exercise selection.
I'm being really fussy about back exercises because it's my thing.
So ultimately, you know, for me, it's horrid.
It really is like single arm dumbbell, you know, kind of transverse plane row.
It's like you couldn't have made-up a routine.
I would hate more as far as the back.
As far as exercise selection goes as.
Far as exercise selection goes for the back, yes, I mean.
Everything that he's doing is going to get well developed because it's good frequency, it's good
volume, and he's not changing the exercises.
So it's a hell of a lot better than most of what we see.
Absolutely, absolutely.
And that's the point, isn't it?
It's like even when these guys are making excise selection errors, they're still getting, you know,
pretty much everything else, right?
And that's the point.
That's the whole point of this, you know, kind of focus on these on this era of time because they,
they knew how to do things, you know, structurally correctly.
And you know what?
If you do that, If you're getting everything else right and you've stuffed up XI selection, the fact
that you're getting everything else right means soon enough you're going to see what.
It's yeah, because.
Everything is getting developed that your training at the moment.
You're kind of look in the mirror and go, why is that not working?
Everything else is fine, and then you'll fix it.
Yeah.
To be fair, you know, I've had that argument has been made to me a number of times by people over
the years.
It's like, why should I kind of listen to you about exercise selection when I can just do this, you
know, routine?
Then I'll see what I'm missing, and then I'll fix it by adding the right exercises in.
I'm like, yeah, if the rest of your routine is good and you.
Exactly, as long as the bones are good.
Yeah, then yeah, you will notice that.
But if you're doing a whole bunch of silly stuff in your routine and you're kind of making a lot of
other mistakes, then no, you won't notice that.
Because nothing is going to work.
And perhaps we should use that as a segue to talk about some of this silly stuff.
So, and you know, this is not us throwing shade on people who are joining the gym next week.
I see a lot of that happening online.
There's no need to do that.
No need to spread hate to people who are joining the gym for the first time in January.
Obviously that's something we want to encourage, but there are a lot of pitfalls and mistakes that
people are likely to walk into.
So we want to identify some of those mistakes now and hopefully we'll avoid some people making them.
Yeah, absolutely.
So we were talking about this sort of going through a list of possible things before we jump to the
podcast.
And I've got a list here that I've written down there isn't.
Or when we were talking about you started analysing out categories, which I've kind of resisted a
little bit because I think some of them blur the edges of those categories.
And so it starts to, I start to lose the, the, the entirety of, of what I want to kind of get into
the, into the episode.
But basically this was inspired by the fact that I've already started to see personal trainers in
the gyms that I go to starting to bring in new clients around this time.
I think they're getting ahead of the the January rush and they're starting to do routines for those
new clients.
And I'm looking at them and I'm kind of taking notes of the things that they're doing that I think
are less effective than, you know, what we'll probably talk about next week, which will be a really
good approach.
And, you know, part of that is probably because the client is expecting a certain type of thing and
part of it is possibly because those, you know, personal trainers, maybe I'll get the information
from other sources.
I don't know.
It doesn't really matter.
The thing is that there are these things that I'm seeing that I think are probably not very
effective and for me at the moment still, and that could this could just be regional.
It doesn't have to be that everyone in the world is experiencing the same trend, but I'm seeing this
persistent tendency for people to program unstable exercises and stability is a continuum.
So this is like, you know, from one end of the spectrum to the other.
So like, if you imagine maybe kind of 1020 years ago, there was a fad and people were taking
instability to an absolute maximum level.
They were kind of doing exercise sizes, balancing on kind of wobble boards and sort of Bosu balls
and stability balls and Swiss balls and any other unstable structure you can think of.
People were doing exercises on those things and it was requiring tiny amounts of muscle, sorry, tiny
amounts of weight, enormous amounts of focus and concentration on balancing rather than actually
producing effort towards motor unit recruitment.
And so you end up with an exercise that is very good at teaching you how to balance and
simultaneously very, very bad at producing high levels of recruitment in the muscles that you're
actually trying to train.
I'm not seeing that level of instability, but I'm seeing something almost there.
So I'm seeing a lot of exercises where people are using cable stations and then standing, you know,
a long way away from that cable station with no means of support other than the floor.
And they're trying to do an exercise that involves them using the floor as their only point to
support.
And then they're moving the cable in some particular direction.
It might be kind of a lat sort of straight arm pull down.
It might be something with the rear door out to the side.
You know, it doesn't really matter what it is.
It could even be a triceps extension.
It doesn't matter what it is.
The point is that their only point to support is the floor, and they're trying to arrange their body
in space to avoid themselves falling over to one side or the other or forwards or backwards while
they're doing the exercise in question.
Of course, what that means is they end up using a much smaller load than they would be able to if
they were, you know, supporting themselves by holding on to the machine in question.
So for me, that's the thing I'm seeing most in the moment, I think is really, really unhelpful.
Because of course, what it means is you end up spreading your activation from the brain across the
entire body to try and stabilize yourself.
And you end up using a much lower level of recruitment in the toe and muscle that you're trying to
train.
So much better to either do the exercise similarly using a point of support or multiple points of
support, or even better to just go and use a machine that kind of gives you all of that support
automatically, you know, rather than messing around with the cables.
Yeah.
One encouragement, encouragement I would make to people on this is don't be scared to perform an
exercise in a slightly variant way that makes it more effective for you or more stable in this
situation.
And this is something that honestly I've only learned over the last few years.
You know, I would think, oh, I have to do an exercise the way that exercise is meant to be done.
And there might be little tweaks one can make, especially if you're using a cable station where you
might, for example, pull to the other end of the station.
So then you can you can wrap your arm around one of those columns and you can stabilize yourself
like that.
Or it might be that if you're, you know, doing like a seated cable exercise, perhaps you have one
leg on the floor instead of both legs on the pads.
And you might find that some of these little tweaks while looking unconventional, will enhance your
stability significantly.
And then all you need to do is just make a mental log.
OK, this is the way I perform that exercise.
And when I log my weight, I'm logging for this version of that exercise.
It doesn't matter that it's slightly different how someone else is performing it.
I would really encourage people to to play around and find ways they can do that.
You know, I use cable stations quite a lot, but I know for me, if I were to do a single arm behind
back standing cable curl and I then so if I'm standing so that the cable's behind me, I'm standing,
I'm doing that compared to I just move a little bit more forward to the other end of the cable
station and wrap my other arm around that beam and I do it like that.
I'm going to lift almost twice as much low doing it like that.
Simple tweak.
I might look here stupid.
Here's an example of going back to the point we raised earlier.
Here's an example of where the amount of weight actually is an interesting piece.
Yes, so yeah, absolutely.
I mean, but equally you've got to kind of be aware have I just increased the load because I've
changed the external levers.
So cable stations can be really annoying in that respect because if you start moving your body in
space around relative machine, you are absolutely going to change the levers.
So you have to be aware that you know if an.
So you need to look at the angle of the cable coming towards your body.
Yeah.
So that's how people can see what's shipping here.
Is is the cable further away, closer to my body?
Am I gripping it further, closer away to my body?
So that's that's an issue there.
But equally, if if nothing is changing about the actual pattern, the the movement in space, but the
exercise becomes suddenly a lot easier and it's, you know, potentially because you just increase the
support availabilities, then that is absolutely going to be an increase in recruitment of the target
muscle that's done that.
So there's a little bit of navigation to be done there.
But yeah, in the context of keeping the movement pattern the same, if you suddenly discover that the
excise has, you know, apparently got easier and you've had to load more weight by some additional
tweak that you've made, then that probably is a +1.
But as I say, it just comes back to these things like changes in load aren't automatically good or
bad.
It's like they just are information, but you've got to kind of go down a level to figure out what is
going on.
Yes, exactly.
A classic example here would be using a cuff instead of a handle for a cable latter raise and then
suddenly you're lifting more load with the cuff.
Have you just?
Have you changed the lever length?
Yeah, yeah.
So it's not always easy to just look at the load and think that that's telling you something.
It's information, but you've kind of got to take a big kind of Sherlock Holmes sized leap to try and
figure out what it is that's actually created that effect.
Yeah, absolutely.
It's not simple information at all.
Now the final point I want to make on on how one can tweak this scenario to work better for them is
if it were me in these cable station scenarios, I would be using a lot more single limb work.
So generally and usually that's just to limit the load, right?
But if you're using a heavier load, like if I identified it's pulling you all over the place, you're
having to like counter that load from pulling you up off the floor, whatever it might be.
You know, imagine triceps, if you're doing like a triceps press down with a cable and you're using
bilateral.
I mean, a lot of people, if you're even remotely strong, you're either going to have to do 30
repetitions or it's going to be pulling you up every single repetition.
So suddenly if you go to unilateral then you know you're using almost half the load and it's going
to be a lot more stable.
Totally.
And on that point, obviously there's a, there's a another positive and another negative.
The other positive is you've now got a free limb that you can use to stabilise itself, which is a
huge positive and negative is that if you're actually strong, then you will rotate.
So you, so this is an issue that those of us who kind of a lot of one arm pull up type work would
have discovered that you instantly just rotate into the direction that you're pulling.
So there's kind of a positive and negative there.
But as I say, if you've got the other arm stabilize yourself, then that shouldn't happen anyway.
So I think on balance I, I, I would definitely go down the route of single arm stuff in that
scenario, but you know, primarily because I can then use Diller armour support.
I think that's that's why I would do that.
Yeah, yeah.
Anything else to be said on stability or does that about cover it?
I mean, it's a fairly basic concept.
Don't do unstable exercises for the sake of being unstable.
Again, it's like, you know, kind of we were joking before we got on the podcast today and I was
like, how many times can I just say this?
You know, you've got a whole gym full of this wonderful equipment that's been specifically designed
to give you more stability.
Please, please go and use it.
It's like, you know, it's like don't have to kind of create.
I think it's this, this is something I think we'll dwell on next week to a certain extent because
there's this perception that if an exercise looks kind of complicated and requires this difficulty
in the balance, you know, sort of realm, if you like that, suddenly it's doing something really
interesting and technical and exciting.
And therefore it's more attractive and it's, you know, kind of more interesting for the client.
And I think that's something we'll probably have to kind of dwell on next week.
But ultimately if we can avoid doing that, I think it's better because those those balance
requirements are going in the opposite direction from what we want to do, which is create, you know,
high level of motor equipment in the target muscles.
And if someone's listening to this and they're thinking, but hang on, I want to work stabilizers, I
want to work my balance, want to work whatever it is you want to work.
OK, do one of those exercises at the end or the start of your workout.
Don't do it as a hypertrophy exercise.
Do not try to achieve both things without one exercise.
To which I would also add that balance is extremely specific to unless you're a kid.
I mean, they learn balance and it's a separate issue, but like sort of in the context of adults
going to the gym, which is our remit, balance is very specific to the exercise that you're training.
You can't learn to balance in one exercise and expect that that's going to transfer balance in some
other scenario.
You're not going to be, you know, suddenly some kind of, you know, superhero being able to balance
and all kinds of weird things.
It's very specific.
So if you if you've got a particular skill, a calisthenic skill that you're learning, then yeah,
practice that either separately or at the beginning of the work, you get better at it.
That's not the same thing as you know doing a making a strengthening excise have a bigger balance
requirement and expecting that to transfer something because not going to.
Yeah, OK.
What is our next listed mistake so.
I've put these in order of of like things that offend me.
I was.
Literally going to say did you just put an order?
How much they annoy you when you say.
This is in order of how much they offend me.
Yeah.
So this this, this second one is probably a contender for the first position.
I'm just kind of at the moment, I'm not seeing it quite so much.
I'm seeing the instability stuff more, but absolutely this is, this is a primary offender, it's the
cardiovascular sensations kind of thing.
So essentially what I'm seeing is that when personal trainers are trying to, you know, deliver value
to their clients, they tend to just try and make them get out of breath.
And that's the opposite of what we want to do.
So, you know, I see them using a lot of high repetition work, a lot of short rest periods and
generally, you know, kind of large muscle mass involved in the exercise selection.
So you know, sort of large kind of squat and deadlift type variations, you know, big sort of lateral
pull down rows, which, you know, great.
I mean, I do them all the time, but they're kind of building routines around full body kind of multi
joint exercises, which again, there's nothing wrong with that.
But when you combine it with short rests and, and, and you know, high repetitions, you're basically
just getting people out of breath and they're going to find that therefore they get nowhere near to
high levels of motel agreement in the exercise they're doing.
And again, combine that with the previous one where the exercises are generally unstable and you're
1,000,000 miles away from high levels of motel agreement.
So it kind of really just becomes like you would say, weighted cardio.
And it blows into the first point anyway in that, hey, if you're trying to achieve a goal with this,
like if you're thinking, Oh well, I'm doing this to kill two birds with one stone and I'm getting
some cardiovascular work.
And by doing this as well, OK, then do the cardiovascular work would make it more effective and do
it actually separately.
And either, you know, do it in the workout or separate day.
I think you're kind of mildly bruising two birds with one stone.
This is certainly killing going.
On yeah, yes, yes, precisely.
And yeah, to the extent that you're going to do one of them, as soon as you lean into into doing one
of them adequately, the other one is going to be done very poorly.
Exactly, exactly.
Yeah, there's the, there's not really a, a zone where you can get both the best of both worlds and
you can't even really get, as you just said, anything approximating A satisfactory result on either
2 worlds simultaneously.
It's really you kind of just go as far as you kind of wonder direction and then as far as you can in
the opposite direction.
And really, you know, for me, if people are doing cardio also, I would just bring the intensity
right the way down to something that's very, very, very kind of, you know, sort of low something
that's much more agreeable.
So that's not kind of going into this sensation disagreeable sensation territory, you know.
So I think really, you know, so the treadmill walking, you know, for me, I prefer the cross trainer.
I think the impact phase is not great about treadmills.
So, you know, cross trainer, especially if you've got the arms working at the same time, you can
really bring down the activation of each muscle group that's working, keeping cardiovascular system
ticking over nicely.
And you can do that and just kind of or go outside and go for a walk.
Whereas, you know, in the gym we kind of want to be trying to minimise disagreeable sensations that
don't come from the Motine recruitment signal.
I want to make sure we get as high recruitment as possible.
So that would be for me the thing that I see, you know, as the second, but again, possibly time for
first.
With the cardiovascular stuff, I mean, don't underestimate, you know, the ability or the benefit of,
like you said, going for a walk or doing some kind of, you know, sport or some outdoor activity.
I mean, I love using that stuff with clients because it a lot of it is learning a skill like you're
actually getting additional bang for back beyond just the cardiovascular benefits.
What do you think of something I use a little bit with clients who especially clients who want to be
in the gym.
You know, those clients were like, yeah, I want, I want six days a week.
Sometimes I'll give those clients a modified strongman on two of those days where they feel like
they're doing weights, but we're not using eccentric parts of that lift and we're using it more for
conditioning, obviously knowing we're not going to be getting much or any hypertrophy benefit out of
that.
Do you have any feelings around strongman type exercises?
So I think the they definitely do kind of fall into a couple of categories there.
So there's the category that is definitively, you know, concentric only, you know, like sled pushes.
I mean, I think that's really interesting because you definitely are going in the territory of
creating a really nice cardiovascular challenge, which you know, is something that you may wish to
obtain, but you know, you're not creating a lot of eccentric induced muscle damage, we think, which
is, you know, important when you're talking about cardio.
So, and if if that is fun and enjoyable and you can get a couple of people doing it and you know,
kind of competitive environment and you know, and it's meeting another set of goals.
Fantastic.
I think there's the other kind of category which I would look at with strongman, which is stuff
that, you know, you don't really want to be doing unless you're going to compete in strongman.
Yes, I mean there's there's a couple of bits and pieces in that I think are interesting for maybe a
grappling sport.
But mostly there's a bunch of stuff in there that I think it's like, you know, there's there's a
relatively high risk of injury in some of that stuff and there's a bunch of eccentric loading.
So I'm straightaway I'm just like, what am I even talking about this for?
Unless the guy is going to be competing in strongman, I'm just not interested just in programming
any of that stuff.
But so I think for me it really does fall into two categories.
There's some really interesting concentric only stuff that's great for conditioning if that's a
goal.
And there's some stuff that I would really just kind of be like, no, this is uniquely for athletes
competing in specific sports.
Yeah, Yeah, that checks out.
So someone to avoid the cardiovascular demand of the exercise you're doing for hypertrophy benefit.
Ultimately, that's going to come mostly down to rest periods actually.
That's the point I wanted to make on that topic.
And rest periods, yeah.
Yes, Now what if someone thinks, oh, hang on, I've only got half an hour though, so therefore I need
to do short dress periods.
I need to do 42nd rest periods so I can do my two to three sets of each exercise and get my full
body session down because you keep telling me full body's the only way to go and that means that I'm
going to be having my heart rate isn't going to be coming down the whole workout.
What do they do?
So straight away in that pen portrait that you just sketched for me, the error that that person is
making is assuming that I need to volume Max instead of frequency Max.
Yeah.
So they're going.
I need three sets.
I know you don't.
You need to do one set you do quality.
And much better to do the three times a week and then to get the three sets in the one workout.
So, yeah, So straightaway I'd be like, no, you need to carve your workout down to a smaller amount
of stuff or you need to do some very clever strategic stuff around clusters and, you know, reps in
reserve and.
Which we might talk about next week, perhaps.
We can do next week, but ultimately it's like straightaway you look at the pen portraying of what
assumptions are being made here that are not correct.
And for me, straightaway the Volume 1 is the one that's not correct.
Because in that scenario, what's interesting is OK, you're getting more volume of work done, but
each one of those sets is less effective than if you just did single sets.
And let me just very briefly kind of go off on a rabbit hole here, which has been a topic that other
people have been making comments about recently correctly, which is that there is a difference
between the rate of progress and how far you can go.
So rate of progress obviously is what it sounds like.
It's like, how fast are you moving forwards in terms of growing muscle mass?
But how far you can go is a separate question.
If you're constantly doing exercises every time you're in the gym with a high level of effort
perception related to cardiovascular sensations, you are basically lowering your your final kind of
sort of end point you're making.
Yeah.
You're stopping yourself getting to a, you know, maximum level of muscle mass because you are never,
ever, ever, ever going to recruit the highest motor units in the muscles that you're training.
You just can't do that.
So ultimately, I think that's a really important point, which is that if you set up your routine to
do that routinely, as in all the time, you're never going to reach the same level of development to
somebody who, you know, kind of maybe takes a slower route, does small amounts of volume each
workout, but gives themselves the rest period in order to achieve higher recruitment in each set
that they do.
Yeah.
Yeah, that's an important distinction.
So you you may actually progress more like quicker if you're doing the multi sets, but only for a
very limited amount of time.
Potentially, yeah.
I mean, it's hard to say, but yeah, they may find that they, especially with muscle swelling being a
factor, but at the end of the day, they might see slightly faster progress to begin with.
But well, yeah, ultimately not go as far.
That was another thing I was inspired to do this this past week post talking about Mensa was I went
back to single sets this week just because I've been too busy.
It was simply I don't have time to get this stuff done.
I'm doing one set per exercise.
It was amazing.
It's done in like 1520 minutes.
But each one of those sets, I'll tell you what, I was adding one.
Or two, Yeah, every single time without fail.
Every single time without fail.
Like, and you really kind of start to go, if I'm adding stimulating reps up and trying to calculate
the stimulating Rep #3 I mean, again, there's a diminishing returns.
But the point is that even if you just go off stimulating reps, you start calculating the number of
stimulating reps, you realize that in three set protocols, you first that may be around 3 or 4
rather than 5.
And then you're kind of like, well, and how much am I losing due to fatigue?
And you kind of add up.
You have what you thought was 15 stimulating reps is probably closed the 11 odd well.
You know and.
Then you do like so maybe now you can see why three sets is more like, you know, double the
hypertrophy of two sets or even less.
But sorry, double hypertrophy of one set or even less.
Yeah, yes, yeah.
And a simple hack is just do two different exercises, one set of each for the same muscle.
If you're like, you know what, I really want to volumize it.
OK go for golf but still do single sets and see how much before.
Better to use more exercises rather than more sets of the same exercise.
I mean, that is absolutely true and just kind of flowing into my the third item on my list with that
observation, which is, you know, very similar, which is that what I see a lot of the personal
trainers doing in the gyms that I go to is varying the exercises either over the week or just kind
of changing them completely.
Making it up each session.
So I've either it's like they're, they're kind of switching exercises from session to session, which
means that you're not training the same exact muscle fibers, or they're just completely changing
them and just sort of doing like, you know, completely new stuff.
And technically it hits the muscle.
And that's probably the one of the statements that's done the worst damage to the fitness industry
in, in, in, in kind of like modern era, you know, the idea that you can, you know, train a muscle,
it's like that statement is wrong.
You cannot train a muscle.
We're training muscle fibres.
Or if you want to be really specific and technical motor units, you know, there's no way that you
can train a muscle.
That's not a thing, You know, it's just not, not something that's possible to do.
So ultimately changing exercises too frequently, whether it's just across the weak or changing
exercises completely, whether you just kind of, you say making up as you go along, doing one
exercise and then coming back the next week, oh, we're doing a different exercise for the same
muscle group.
That's a horrible approximation of what's happening.
There's there's basically no time you should be changing exercise except for within the session.
Like we've just said, more exercises for single sets as opposed to multi sets on a single exercise.
But aside from that, like if you're changing the cross sessions in the week, obviously you're
missing out.
Yeah, if you're changing across weeks and missing out, even if you're changing across phases, you're
still missing out.
Unless you need to change that exercise because you've plateaued for ages.
It's hurting, you're going backwards, whatever that necessity is.
It's mostly going to be practical reasons rather than physiological reasons.
Yeah, yeah.
It's interesting you made the observation when we were talking about this podcast.
You made the observation to me that we had this kind of historical phase where periodization was
constructed mainly of people changing Rep ranges and then as people realized the Rep range, you
know, kind of doesn't really do anything they.
Wanted to keep the periodisation and they got rid of 1.
Yeah, you, you and I could probably have a kind of a whole conversation about the philosophical
nature of human kind of thought processes that require them to keep things that don't work, you
know, Hegelian dialectics and all that kind of stuff.
But, you know, for the purposes of this podcast, yeah, people kind of want to keep trappings or, you
know, elements of previous kind of practices, just kind of modify them to lose some of the less kind
of desirable bits and pieces.
So we kind of kept the periodization idea and left behind the red brain changes.
And we kind of now people want to change exercises and it's like, let's kind of get rid of that as
well.
Let's kind of just get rid of all of that silly idea and just kind of stick with stuff and do it
repeatedly until it actually produces an effect, rather than kind of changing it all the time and
not expecting anything.
I made the point online a while ago that in fact if I were to periodise, I'd much prefer periodise
Rep ranges with the knowledge that it's not doing anything.
But if you want it for novelty, go for gold because you're not losing anything unless it is
something this.
Will be at the next week I'm sure when you come up giving us some tips and suggestions on how.
To fool people.
How to fool people into thinking that they get to that that entertainment value.
But yeah, so you know, the idea of periodizing exercises is definitely not not a cool idea.
I mean, OK, fine.
If, like I've said before, I really like full body ABI, feel like it's a really nice compromise in
many ways.
If you don't want to do a billion exercises in the single session, you can kind of split it across 2
workouts and do 3 workouts.
So we, I really, really like that compromise.
But that's as far as I would go because that's the kind of the limit that you've got in terms of
atrophy happening within training week.
Other than that, I don't think we should be changing exercises between sessions if we want maximum
kind of efficacy of the programs that we're writing.
Yeah, Yeah.
I think it's fairly simple.
I think it's a lot more we're going to say to that is a.
Not really.
But then it ties into the 4th item on my list, which is that I don't see anybody tracking numbers
and progressive overload.
You know, it's like I go in the gym, I've got my notes app and straight away I'm like, what did I do
last time?
What was the number?
OK, here it is.
That's what I did last time.
This is what I'm going to try and beat this time and that's it.
That's simple, you know, and I don't see anybody doing that.
I mean, there's occasionally you can see some people kind of doing the same thing, but very, very
rarely.
It's not a theme.
And I think if we want to make sure programs are working, we've got to be tracking that progressive
overload over time.
Why does it matter?
Because there's there's multiple moving paths to this and it's and, and in fact, the reason people
think it matters is not one of the things as to why it matters, right?
People assume.
Don't get me started.
Oh wow.
So there's this, there's this whole of the culture, there's this whole subculture of people who
think that progressive overload is what drives hypertrophy.
I mean honestly, honestly like, like.
Is the same.
Trolling me.
This is amazing.
I mean seriously, I mean unbelievable.
So the idea that you can kind of the idea that the exercise or the machine or the weight is somehow
acting on you rather than the other way around.
It's like that.
That's, that's not what's happening here.
You know, it's, it's like you can't.
And I think maybe the I've said this before, but the terminology is unhelpful because it sounds
overload sounds.
Overload doesn't make sense.
Yeah.
No, it doesn't.
We're doing something to the muscle.
No, the muscle is doing everything.
I mean, it's just progressive loading isn't it?
Like essentially.
It's progressive.
Oh yeah, progressive loading, not overloading, because overload is an excess of something.
And you can't have an excess of something because you can only have what the muscle is capable of
doing.
So it's like the progressive overload is the sign that the muscle has got stronger.
That's it.
Now, as you kind of hint to that a moment ago, there are a number of other reasons why you might
have got stronger.
You know, now some of them are actually helpful for Hypertroy.
So you like, if you're relatively kind of sort of new to the exercise, you might be improving
coordination, which is not really a, you know, big deal, but it will provide a large increase.
Well, that ties back into the exercise selection piece, because you change exercises all the time
and all you're doing is coordination.
But you also do need to get through that phase so that you can start to get to the increasing
emoting recruitment phase because if your brain is focusing on the coordination and exercise, it's
not really hitting Max recruitment.
Therefore you wouldn't be increasing recruitment in the muscle.
So you've kind of even though even though coordination improvements in coordination induced
improvements in strength are not overtly helpful, they are necessary to get through before you can
get to the recruitment point.
If they get to the helpful bit.
Yeah.
So like if somebody is improving strength rapidly and, and, and it's a good exercise, you know, it's
not a silly kind of kneeling on the floor waving people in the air exercise, as I would say, you
know, it's a good, still a good thing.
It's like, yeah, fantastic, let's keep moving forward.
And then, yeah, you'll start to see the strength gain slowed out even better.
That's like that's the point where we're now starting to see recruitment gains and starting to get
some really nice kind of high levels of motive equipment that are going to produce in good
hypertrophy.
So even when it's a coordination improvement that is driving the strength and I'm still not unhappy,
I'm just kind of like I'm just cognizant of that is what it is.
You know, something I learned from Charles and people who followed Charles and Stefan Ghazal was in
people who are less experienced at these more complex lists, say using multi joint exercise, like
let's say a squat.
So what they would teach is you would actually use that squat in later series in these less advanced
clients.
So you'd say you're doing whatever the split is and you might have a leg extension as well.
Well, you would start with a leg extension and then you would do the squat.
And then you have an advanced client and they would often swap it.
And we could argue about whether you should or should not swap it.
But I like that idea of, OK, if I've got a new lift, which I know has a coordination demand, I'm not
thinking of that really as a hypertrophy exercise initially.
I'm just going to put it somewhere where it's not going to mess anything else up in the program, let
them get coordinated it and then we'll use it later for hypertrophy.
Yeah.
I mean, that's, that's, that's the strategy, isn't it?
I mean, that's I mean, I probably wouldn't even program the exercise in the first place.
But if you want, if you've got a client, you know you want to get them squatting.
I'm not.
Going to.
OK, well.
You know what I mean?
I'm not going to get them.
Like we're not getting very far with quad development initially.
If they're, you know, say, say we want to learn a front squat or something like that, you know, a
lot of people still want to learn some of these more complex exercises and then it's not going to do
a whole lot initially.
Yeah.
I mean, I think we're starting to move into athletic domains there where you're saying, you know,
you want to have a, you want to develop a skill.
I mean, that's just a whole kind of separate kind of category of conversation.
But yeah, absolutely.
As a strategy, if somebody has multiple goals and bodybuilding is one goal and learning how to do an
exercise is another goal, then yeah, you kind of treat them as separate things, don't you?
I mean, and we kind of put them in different places in the workout and avoid, you know, interference
between the two things.
And ultimately, it really depends on the emphasis that the client wants to place on each of those
things, how we strategize that.
But yeah, I mean, from a bodybuilding point of view, I'm just not going to program that stuff.
It doesn't make any sense to me.
Something else that I've seen that is probably not and I'm now I'm now getting to the point on my
list where.
This is a new point.
This is a new point on your list just just before we move off the progressive overload part.
So obviously, I, I want to quickly play devil's advocate.
So if one were not logging their weight, but they're doing the other stuff we've mentioned.
So they're repeating the exercises, they're doing it frequently enough and you know, they might come
in and, and maybe they do the same load as last time they do it, they do a couple kilos less or
whatever, right?
Well, if you're saying, hey, there's about 5 stimulating repetition that's set to failure, give or
take.
And, and let's say they're, you know, not logging in the load.
And so they've got a little bit lighter than they could have.
They're still getting stimulating repetitions.
So why does it actually matter?
Like you've identified, it's not the fact that progressive overload is causing the adaption.
So why does it matter if they log or if they don't log?
So what tends to happen as we progress over time and get stronger is that the number of adaptations
that are available to us that increased strength get smaller, and their contribution to strength
gains also get smaller.
So for example, like we were just describing, when you first go and design your exercise, you've got
these gigantic improvements in coordination.
And so you experience these huge improvements in strength.
And every time you go back to the gym, like you're bumping the weight up and everything just feels,
you know, kind of very easy.
And it's just this wonderful experience.
And then that starts to go away and it starts to get trickier.
Now the problem is that our brains get conditioned to think that that initial phase is kind of how
it's supposed to be forever.
That's why you get these people who start lifting for the first time and then they their bench press
goes, you know, kind of up by sort of 1020 kilos over the space of a couple of months.
And they start imagining that they're going to be benching the world record in two years time.
Everybody goes through that phase.
So the problem with that though, is that as the contributions of these adductions shrinks, people
start to not push to increase the weight quite so much.
They start to expect that it's just going to be easier.
And actually, when you get to the point where you're plateauing on pretty much all of your
adaptations apart from hypertrophy, the amount you actually have to work to get that extra Rep is
quite a lot.
And naturally people just tend not to do that.
They just tend to kind of just stick where they are.
So what you tend to find is that people who aren't logging will just end up get they'll go through
these toe fate.
So they'll go through these early phases where they're getting these gigantic strength gains and
they've just been conditioned to expect that's how it should be forever.
And they just just stop improving.
And so ultimately just get trapped at a particular kind of Rep of load combination and without the
the log book in front of you telling you that that's what you're doing, people just kind of just sit
there and, and I think that's what we see in gyms a lot.
We see people going through coordination phase, getting their strength up in a notch and then just
stopping there because they expect that the rest of the journey should be the same.
And it's.
Not so.
Ultimately, they must be training at a certain repetitions away from failure, like to to stop seeing
any adaptations occur, or almost any.
Yeah, it's basically that.
I mean, if you want to really get granular, what happens is that we get to a certain Rep load
combination and then what's going to happen is you, you do get a little bit of an adaption with that
replet combination.
Let's say you're either at failure or one RIP in reserve or something like that.
And you you achieve a little bit of hypertrophy.
We don't achieve any other adaptations that are helping you increase strength because at this point,
you've kind of got pretty much all of that.
And technically now you could do an extra Rep, but you don't feel like you can because it's just
still that kind of zone where you're expecting a, an easier feeling to be accompanying you as you
get stronger.
But you haven't got any of that other stuff going on in the background as well.
You literally just got hypertroid.
So you start to get a little bit further away from failure and then you get a little bit further
away and you get a little bit further away.
And now you're kind of in that zone where you kind of always in that sort of 3 or 4 reps in reserve.
Combine that with the idea of what we've been talking about, which where you're in a multi set
situation, you probably already were, you know, kind of two reps away from this number anyway.
You probably just kind of literally now are running on fumes where you're just putting enough in the
tank every single time you go to the gym to take you over to the next workout.
You're never actually going to make any long term progressions.
So I think it's, I'm describing a scenario where people have used, you know, kind of gone on the
journey they've done, you know, kind of three to six months worth of training they've.
Got all the coordination stuff they've got a lot of the motive and stuff, all the other bits and
pieces and now they're just hovering around that zone where the only thing that can really move them
forward is hypertrophy.
They, they've been conditioned by the previous six months to expect the feeling of, of getting
stronger to be a lot easier than it currently is.
And they therefore start to just drift back into the zone where they're, you know, multiple reps in
reserve away from failure, which already is probably only three stimulating reps as we were talking
about earlier in the context of many exercises with multiple set protocols.
Yeah, because the reason I'm pushing on this is because I think that that's probably the big part of
what's happening here is essentially this motivation aspect.
Because as we've just said, OK, if you do a single set, you're probably going to get 1-2 at least
repetitions more than what you would normally.
So maybe we're arguing, hey, there might be.
And you know, we, we did a podcast a few weeks ago where we talked about they were doing 3 to 5
repetitions and saw similar games, right.
So maybe we're now saying there could be 3 or 4 stimulating repetitions for some people in a set.
Yeah.
And so in multi set protocols.
Yes, Yeah, yeah, yeah, exactly.
And so now if, if there's say, only three maximally simulated repetitions and they've allowed
themselves to drift No2 repetition shy of failure, well, we're getting like you've identified enough
to hold over those gains, but not really enough to see anything new occur.
So when you have the logbook, it keeps you honest.
It keeps you realizing, OK, this is my target.
This is motivating me.
It's giving me a target, a goal.
I think that that's where most of the value is.
But yeah, absolutely.
I mean, it's, it's, it's pushing people to be honest with themselves about where they currently are.
And the fact that if they don't, and I think this is an important point which is that if if we don't
sort of add reps on to our current kind of Rep load combination, we aren't going to it that that's
telling us we're not adding.
Anything else we're not seeing?
Just to be clear, people are still really confused about this because they go every time I raise
this issue, they're like, Oh well, no, strength and size are not the same thing.
No, they're not the same thing.
That's correct.
But but you cannot add muscle tissue but not get stronger.
Okay, so there's no scenario in which you can be doing the same Rep load combination now and in six
months time and have added muscle mass in that period of time.
It is not possible if you've increased, but equally you could have got stronger and not added
muscle.
The other way around is fine.
I mean, that's the bit that people can seem to like.
Their brains seem to explode when I, when I and I kind of raised this point, that's every single
person, no matter how smart they are and how well read they are and how tightly constructed their
arguments are.
Every single person is using reverse causality on this argument to make that point.
Every person is doing that.
They're all going look, I can get stronger without getting bigger.
Therefore you're wrong.
I'm like, no, I'm accepting your argument that way around.
I'm not accepting your argument the way around.
You can't add muscle mass and not get stronger.
That's not possible.
Either feeling I'm going to see videos in TikTok this week being like look how stupid Chris is.
Hang on, this is probably where it's going to go.
I think they're going to say you can get bigger without getting stronger.
It's called sarcoplasmic hypertrophy.
So like sarcoposmic hypertrophy is not an adaption.
It's a phase that muscle fibers go through as they're progressing from one state to another.
That's that's that.
And that's actually not that controversial.
I mean, you'll find most hypertrophy researchers, you know, kind of more or less in that, in that
zone.
I think so.
Yeah.
I mean, that's, that's only really slightly more long if you want to kind of look at time periods
like muscle swelling is like maybe a week long phenomenon at most.
Psychopathic hypertrophy is maybe a couple of weeks phenomenon before you phase back out of it.
Interestingly, if you look at the cross-sectional studies that measure the difference in my
fibrillar density between because ultimately sarcophagic hypertrophy is basically just saying my
fibrillar density is going down.
That's all they're saying.
So if you kind of look at a cross-sectional studies, what you'll find is that the micro fibrilla
density of people who've been training for a longer period of time, say four years is higher than
the people who've been only training for a few months.
So it does look like over time we gradually move towards a slightly more dense arrangement of
myofibrils, which is the opposite of psychopathsmic hypertrophy.
So in the context of what we're describing here, which is, you know, people who've been training six
months to a year or two years or whatever, and we're describing how progressive overload keeps us
adding more muscle mass.
Sarcoplasm hypertrophy is just not even on the table as a thing.
It's not a conversation that we, it's like it's just not relevant.
It's a thing that happens to people you know, in in in contexts that are much shorter in duration
and probably less well trained.
Cool.
OK, well hopefully if you get stitched they add that part of the conversation in as well.
We could have an entire conversation about why I don't care.
I mean, ultimate ultimately, you know, 99.9% of social media that discusses the issues that I'm
talking about is doing so in order to accrue social credibility and power.
They're not doing it because they're trying to, you know, educate.
They're not doing it because they're interested in finding an answer.
And so they're not having a conversation with me.
And people get like, they, they, they get upset that I don't want to talk to them.
I'm like, I don't want to talk to you because you're not doing the same thing as me.
I'm trying to figure out how this stuff works.
You're trying to accrue social power.
That's just not the same thing.
It's like, you know, and I'm not going to play your game because I'm not here to to do that.
So anyway, there you go.
What's next on your list?
My next thing on my list is actually something that you pointed out when we were having this
conversation, because this is actually now entering the zone of things that are not high on my list
of things that I see being problematic.
And the reason, and again, this is something we talked about.
The reason I'm not seeing this on my list of something that's problematic is because it actually
gets negated by another error earlier on my list.
So.
So because you're seeing more of that first error, you're seeing less of.
This this error, Yeah.
So this error is where people do do exercise or training variable combinations that are very muscle
damaging.
So eventually maybe they're doing a lot of focus on eccentrics.
Maybe they're they're doing a lot of intensification type stuff where they're trained to failure and
then do drop sets or, you know, length and partials or whatever.
And essentially or you know, they're doing tons and tons of, you know, sets to failure high volume.
This is really being negated by the cardiovascular sensations error.
Yeah.
Because if you have high level of cardiovascular sensation in the actual exercise you're doing, you
can't really get into this territory where you're hitting high levels of motive recruitment with,
you know, sort of high volumes and therefore produce a lot of muscle damaging effects.
So that's why this isn't really on my list, but it absolutely could be on my list if somebody was
approaching things in a different way.
I just, I just, I'm not seeing it right now.
It's very interesting how one mistake can actually protect you from another mistake.
You need something we've touched on a little bit with some of the golden era plans where there was
this high, you know, density, low rest periods between sets, high repetitions, high cardiovascular
demand.
And we look at it like how are they doing so much volume?
Well, they're doing so much volume because it's not muscle damaging, because it's low quality volume
essentially.
So it's interesting that there's sometimes a protective effect of some of these areas or you know,
like we talked about last week, maybe they were being done intentionally or, or unconsciously or
subconsciously intentionally in a way to protect from injuries or whatever it might have been.
But either way, there's there's a potential upside to one of these downsides.
Now, this was the point I brought up because I see this a lot with either you have new people in the
gym, especially like younger guys, and there's sort of like a little bit of an ego, like alpha male
kind of sort of mentality or approach going on.
And they try to outwork the people that they're training with.
And they do things like run the rack with the dumbbells and they do, you know, 400 sets of dumbbell
curls or just excessive amounts of volume.
Or the other sort of flip side here is you get people who've taken a couple weeks off, a month off,
whatever, in December, they've been busy and then they get back into the gym and they kind of think,
well, yeah, I kind of need to make up all this time I lost.
And they've lost some of that protective effect that they had in place from, you know, they had not
trained now for a month.
And so repeated bad effect essentially has been lost.
And then suddenly they jump in with high volumes or the the volume they had previously been doing.
And that's high enough that they now caused more muscle damage initially than they would have
previously been causing when they were more, I guess, trained.
So that's something that I think people need to, I know everyone wants to see results yesterday, but
for the first week, maybe just kind of chill out a little bit, drop the volume a little bit, maybe
keep your repertoire and deserve.
Don't try to kill yourself with damaging exercise and and high volumes and just kind of, you know,
ease your way back into it.
Oh yeah, definitely.
I mean, that's always the right answer.
I mean, it's a marathon, not Sprint.
So, so that's what I've really got to say on that one.
I mean, I, I, as I say, it's definitely an error, but I don't actually see it that much at the
moment.
And in fact, the next on my list is also pretty much the same, which is that technically it will be
an error for people to, you know, kind of use bro splits or, you know, even really upper lower I'm
not a fan of.
But again, because of the cardiovascular sensations chasing, I'm tending to see a lot of personal
trainers just throwing their clients through full body routines because they're trying to make them
as our breath as possible.
And that's the easiest way of doing that.
And so I don't tend to see that error.
I think that error is much more in our niche kind of bodybuilding sort of a part of the fitness
industry rather than the kind of client facing part, which is, you know, 90% of the of the of the
industry really.
So yeah, it's again, something we've talked about 100 million times, but it's just not not something
that I'm seeing when I go to the gym.
I see that less amongst personal trainers.
I certainly think that PTS nowadays are using more full body or upper lower.
I'd say upper lower is probably a little bit more popular, but either way, it'll be one of these
splits.
Where I see this mistake being made is by general population, individuals who are not using a coach
and not using APT and either just Googling a workout routine or they've got a, you know, a mate
who's been going to the gym and they write them a routine or whatever.
And in a lot of the work I do with clients and, and consultations that I do, I see this not like
you'd you'd think, OK, maybe enhanced lifters are doing it.
We all know that there's this carryover from what we've seen in the golden era.
And OK, maybe that's a mistake that's been grandfathered in.
No, no, I'm not just seeing it with that type of client.
I'm seeing this with like, you know, your middle-aged female client who's new to the gym.
I'll do a console with them.
Hey, you know, what's your exercise routine look like?
And it's very sweet.
I'm like, Michelle, Are you sure you really need an arms day?
Like, I don't know that that's achieving what you think it's achieving.
So I think maybe it's not a thing over there, but over here it's it's certainly an issue.
So like you said, is there much more we need to say to it?
Probably not.
I'm sure everyone who's listening to us has heard us say this a million times.
But there's, I mean, God, like, what is a gross split doing correctly?
It's getting you in the gym.
Like I can't think of really anything else it's doing.
It's it, there's nothing it's doing well.
There's some of these things that it's it's doing mutually or poorly.
God, I'm trying to rack my drain for anything it's doing even remotely well.
And it's not.
So yeah, not a good option for for anyone.
I can't think of anyone than it's a good option for.
And there's a lot of this is what we see.
And again, this is a philosophical statement, I suppose.
But people have a tendency to do something which is nonsensical and then retrospectively apply sense
to it and be like, well, This is why.
This is why I do it very split.
And somehow they try to justify how it makes sense.
And that was that was the, the frame that we had on the Chris and Paul show for like 2 years.
His name is Robert Paulson is the Fight Club scene.
Basically, they're kind of looking at each other, trying to figure out how to overcome this kind of
discrepancy between two sources, 2 pieces of information which are mutually contradictory.
And then they kind of like they battle their way through live on screen to produce the synthesis of
this, of this problem.
And that's, that's what you're describing.
I mean it's.
Exactly, Exactly, yes.
And so I see people justifying why to do a gross split all the time.
And it's like, just don't do it.
Just don't, don't retrospectively justify your actions.
Like if you use the information to construct what you're going to do, not to to explain what you did
do.
But you know, I hear people talking about Oh, well, you know, if I'm doing a gross split, like
frequency is high because, you know, muscles are being trained isometrically when I'm.
Doing the whole, with the whole muscles being trained, I mean, hitting muscles, draining muscles,
whatever vocabulary we use is oh, absolutely invalid.
You know, the only thing that happens is muscle fibers on motor units are getting recruited or
activated.
There's no, there's no scenario in which you can kind of get all this exercise and that exercise.
They both train the same muscle.
I'm like, that's not a statement that means anything.
You can't train the muscle.
It's not, that's not how this works, you know, So that is that that idea has done so much damage to
to the understanding of how this stuff works.
Yeah.
I mean, I guess essentially if you just start with hypertrophies, muscle fibre specific and there's
diminishing returns of of gains in terms of additional sets, then take those two principles and then
you'll.
Derive the silver era routine you will.
You will, and you'll realize, hey, this bracelet makes no sense.
Yeah, and you realize that all the very split stuff is just because steroids got arrived in the
1960s?
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
And a point I've been making online at the moment, and I'm convinced of this.
Obviously, it's speculation, but I think a lot of what we see in the way the plants have evolved
since steroids were introduced is probably a way or are ways to manage some of the downsides of
steroid use.
And so then what we see is naturals who are following stereot inspired plans, but they don't have
the same limitations.
And so you're following a plan that was never made for you.
You're following a plan that hopefully was designed to meet the limitations of a particular
population, of which you are not.
I mean, you may be if you're on hands lift.
OK.
Yeah.
And.
I'm and I'm still not really clear how that works either because and that's me saying that I'm I'm
interested in how to make this make sense because at the moment I can understand the risks that we
talked about last week in the episode about anabolic steroids and the, you know, the injury risks
associated with connective tissue.
There's definitely something going on there that caused people to, you know, maybe or maybe caused
people to move away from the silver irritated routines towards something else, but it doesn't really
line up perfectly with me yet.
I can't quite see how volumes increased.
That doesn't make sense to me.
I can understand my frequencies might have gone down.
Sure.
But I still can't quite understand why.
And I can understand why intensification techniques came in and rest periods got shorter and all
that kind of thing.
I mean, that all of that makes sense where you're trying to increase fatigue to reduce the strain on
the tendon, fine, but I still can't quite see how we ended up doing crazy workout volumes at the
same time.
To me, it would have made more sense for them to, unless you kind of say, well, that's the
performative bit.
Yeah, I mean, obviously this is a whole, you know, another conversation we could have.
But I think what's interesting if you look at that is there was, there's obviously bodybuilders, we
can identify who we're doing single sets or two sets.
And there's bodybuilders who are doing 6 sets, 10 sets and their frequency exercise selection.
All that looks the same.
So it's like, OK, what's the the what's the thing here that's causing the?
Outcome to be yeah exactly sure, sure.
So the, the reduced frequency fine, you know, and you know, they try and use fatigue to minimise,
you know, kind of the, the, the tendon sort of damage fine.
But some people are doing high volumes as we were doing low volumes and it just doesn't seem to make
any difference.
Fine, OK, no, I mean, I get my head around that.
But ultimately, as I say, there's definitely that performative aspect where people have to keep sort
of selling the fact that they have this knowledge that is what's driving the, you know, kind of
success rather than the steroid itself.
And that's that's kind of muddying the waters because that definitely exists.
And, you know, there's no, no surprise when you look at some of these magazines at that time, you
know, these people were being described as as, you know, Superman.
You know, this person is a Superman.
They're able to do this many sets.
The average man cannot do that many.
Exactly.
It's totally performative.
So you know, it's it's part of the the the kind of the mythology that grows up around that that
area.
So you kind of, although we like to reduce stuff back down to single reasons for things, sometimes
when you especially in sociological situations like this is you kind of up to maybe accept that
there's a muddier answer to to the kind of question which may be what we're stuck with.
So was there anything else on your list or was that?
I have a bonus item on the list which is related to we talked about last time, which is injury risk.
So essentially I don't, I don't see this as being a huge deal.
I think a lot of the personal trainers, if not all the personal trainers that I see are cognizant of
injury risk and I do.
Think that's because they want a pain client.
They don't want an injuster.
That clients, so I don't think and again with the cardiovascular stuff generally speaking that we're
keeping, you know, kind of, you know, muscle damage relatively low.
People have breath all the time.
They're not going to be able to do tons and tons and tons of reps of stuff, but equally I think
there just are a couple of observations to be made.
Yes.
Firstly, if we are doing exercises that have huge amounts of variation possible, so like if the
exercise is not a fixed bar path, if the exercise is not kind of constrained, then there is
potential for, you know, kind of movements in directions that you weren't expecting to compensations
that you weren't expecting.
And that does kind of potentially lead to the possibility of an injury occurring.
So that's a minor thing, but it's just some that I'm aware of.
Similarly, if you are doing really, really high numbers of repetitions, then you kind of are
drifting, especially with somebody who hasn't got previous strength training experience, then you
are drifting in a territory where the tendon is going to be bouncing around quite a lot.
So light load does allow the tendon to strain and recoil.
A heavy load doesn't allow it to do that.
Strain and recoil is what damages the tendon, not the force that's supplied through it.
I keep saying this, people just keep like, you know, sort of ignoring me.
And it's absolutely how tendon damage happens.
So tendon damage is a strain and recoil phenomenon.
Light loads with high repetitions are going to allow the tendon to strain and recoil many, many
times.
That is basically going to create.
You know, sort of a damaging effect which could lead to a problem in the future.
Is that more of an issue with fast tempos?
I'm not sure actually.
I think it's, it's a really difficult one to answer.
I would say probably yes, but again, I wouldn't want people to run around with the idea that that
means that if they do their light load sets with slow tempo, they're immune to this problem because
I don't think that's true.
Ultimately, I wouldn't do high Rep kind of work, especially high volume, high Rep work with somebody
who hasn't already got a stiff tendon.
Ultimately, just kind of as a very, very brief rabbit hole, this is what calisthenics athletes run
into when they start doing tons and tons and tons of reps of pull ups or whatever other skill
they're trying to improve on.
They're like, and that's some for some reason, their coach tells them they need to do high Rep pull
ups because they think that's good for the connective tissue, which is actually the opposite.
It's bad.
If they instead did like heavy sort of weighted pull ups in small volumes, that would actually not
have those issues because what's happening is the tendon gets stiffer from the heavy load and then
is able to resist being lengthening, lengthened in other scenarios.
So for somebody who's done a bunch of heavy strength training, they then go and do some high Rep
work because they want to or they fancy a change or whatever, it doesn't matter.
They're not going to have the same issues because the tendon is already stiff.
If you kind of take somebody who's never done any of that and you start throwing high Rep work at
them, then they're kind of, I think that risk is increasing.
Now as I say, you can minimise that effect with the cardiovascular sensations because the
cardiovascular sensations stop people doing as many reps as they would do if they were kind of
fresh.
But it so it does kind of start to mitigate that problem.
But again, something to be aware of in that particular context.
And then equally again for people who don't have sort of strength training adaptations like
customary addition and sarcoididesis, I think again, potentially there is a muscle strain injury
risk issue if you start throwing them too much into a muscle damaging routine.
And then kind of, you know, doing that again and again and again and again.
Again, not something I'm seeing people doing.
I don't see that is on the radar right now, but potentially if you did, like you were saying,
perhaps people who've maybe had a month or so off because of busy period of time and then come back
and they start throwing themselves into make up for lost time and they start doing really muscle
damaging stuff.
And they keep doing that really muscle damaging stuff week on week on week because that's ultimately
what creates muscle strain injury.
People don't realize people love to do this armchair quarterback thing where they look at exactly
what somebody was doing at the point where the muscle kind of strained and they're all kind of
analyzing and drawing lines on the graph going, oh, this is what they were doing and that's why it
went wrong.
And like, no, it was literally what they did for the month prior to that at that point that was
causing a problem because strain injury is literally just a progressive effect of tiny strain
accumulation.
So again, not seeing that happening at the moment, but like as a bonus thing we can kind of mention.
Now, from an injury perspective or standpoint argument I still see being made is that the way to
prevent this or at least mitigate against it is simply just do multiple warm up sets.
And the best warm up is simply to do the exercise that you're going to do for the working set.
And so you do your three sets of 10 warm up repetition sets, and then that's going to somehow
magically protect you from getting injured.
And that's simply not doing what people think it's doing, is it?
Oh yeah, I mean, that's the Luke Skywalker meme.
Everything in that sentence is wrong.
I mean, I mean, everything in that sentence is wrong.
So yeah, basically the best, as you said, the best way to mitigate muscle strain injuries, for
example, is not to do what?
So that's not the best way to do it.
It is a it is a way of helping, but it is not going to, well, even that's arguable.
Actually, the best way to do it is to not create the fatigue accumulation in the 1st place.
That's in fact, that's pretty much the only way.
Way you're going to do it, Yeah.
Because ultimately, even if you were doing the most perfect warmth in the world every single time,
if you're a stocking stimulating strain injury, minor strain injury from session to session by doing
really muscle damaging stuff and not recovering from it, then all that would happen is your muscle
strain injury would happen.
You know, further down the line instead of earlier.
That's all that would happen.
You would just delay it a few weeks.
Just buying yourself a little bit of time.
You're buying yourself another couple of weeks, so it's not actually going to save you from.
So the the ultimate thing that does cause those strain injuries is the accumulation of very, very
tiny strains in tight inside single muscle virus eventually kind of accumulate to the point where
the entire kind of section of muscle fails.
If we talk about what warm ups are doing, if you do a temperature improvement increase in the muscle
by either putting it in a warm bath of water or doing aerobic exercise for 1520 minutes prior to a
strength training session, then what will happen is that the muscle fibres will be better able to
resist the strain injuries from occurring.
Whether that's on a single fibre level or across the whole muscle level, that's irrelevant in the
scenario which you are kind of putting them in.
So it's like a yeah, you give them a bit of a defensive strategy for it.
But again, all that will happen is it will just increase the amount of fatigue accumulation that you
need before you're going to cause a failure to occur.
So all it will do is buy you a couple of weeks.
Strength training sets aren't achieving that anyway.
So if somebody does a say 3 or 4 strength training sets as a warm up prior to their main set, that
is not achieving a muscle temperature increase because it's just nowhere near enough exercise to be
able to do that.
You need 15 to 20 minutes of aerobic exercise or sit in a warm bath of water.
Yeah, not 3060 seconds of your warm up.
Not a couple of, especially given that most of us when we're doing well sets, we're probably not
doing, you know, high reps anyway because we want to try and avoid the fatigue that is associated
with those.
So really I don't know where this idea has come from that you can do a couple of warm up sets and
that somehow reduces muscle strain injury risk.
It doesn't.
That's not what it's doing.
It's getting you comfortable with the weight and making sure you know, especially like at my age, I
want to make sure that nothing is going to break when I, when I do a set because, you know, I could
have aged in the last.
Sometimes when I look at what happens on social media, I feel like I have aged years and I'm like,
you know, just keep coming back to this thing about, I forget whether it's a genuine Einstein quote
or whether it's one of those that got attributed to him where he says, you know, about things that
are infinite, you know, and there's only two things that are infinite, you know, the universe and
human stupidity.
I.
Don't know what the exact quote is, but broadly speaking, that's kind of, you know, you just see
these insane things being said about all kinds of stuff.
And but yeah, string training sets are not creating a temperature increase.
They're not doing that.
If somebody has a study that shows that they do that, please, you know, kind of wave it around and,
you know, triumphantly tell me that I'm wrong.
But I don't think such a study exists and it doesn't make sense.
Studies on warm up sets are pretty weak.
Yeah, there's pretty much nothing out there.
And you know, if if somebody wants to go, oh, but it improves performance, I'm like fine, there's a
potential post activation potentiation effect of doing a, you know, high, a short burst of high
recruitment activity prior to doing another, you know, we call it conditioning direction prior to
doing a strength training.
So that's not the same thing.
Yeah.
That's not preventing you from getting injured and may not be doing much from a hypertrophy
standpoint either.
We don't know.
But it's, it's not the muscle temperature thing that's the important bit.
It's a phosphorylation of myosin regulatory light chains.
It's a separate kind of phenomenon entirely.
When we're talking about the the evidence base that exists for reducing muscle strain injury, There
is some really nice data showing that if you warm up a muscle temperature wise, it does reduce the
risk of injuries.
That's absolutely 100% true.
But strength training sets or not doing that?
I genuinely think this is where all the confusion comes in because the studies that.
Talk about that.
It's word thinkers.
It's people that go, I see the word warm up on the page and that must mean the same thing.
That's warm up elsewhere.
Precisely.
Scott Adams has done this.
He's done a beautiful analysis of word thinkers, which is, I mean, there's probably a very rude way
of describing it, but basically it's like, you know, people who are trapped by this kind of use of
words, they think that words always mean the same thing in every single context.
It's like, that's not how language works.
That's not how concepts work.
We use words to describe concepts.
You have to be aware that the map is not the territory.
You've got to be aware that sometimes when we're using the words as a map that is not perfectly
describing the underlying physiological reality.
You've got to go and just check that you are in fact describing the same thing and warm up said is
not the same thing as a muscle warming up period of exercise, you know.
And so, but the problem is, again, somebody who's just not focused on being precise and telling, you
know, things how they are, who's just focusing on accruing, you know, followers and being popular
can just kind of rely on the fact that a lot of human beings are word thinkers and they just get
trapped by this kind of, oh, that's that word there in that context.
That means the same thing as that word in this other context.
And they can rely on the fact that people don't question that and then suddenly they're, you know,
kind of blowing up their social media account, making a point that's completely invalid.
That's the world we live in, so.
Social media So there you have it, that is our list of pitfalls to avoid next week or for all time.
Whenever you're in the gym, you avoid these pitfalls.
That was in your list, wasn't it?
But we didn't miss an.
That is my list, absolutely.
Yeah, that's all of those things, including the bonus one at the end, which I don't really think, as
I say, to be fair to personal trainers, I don't think they do run that risk.
It's just something that is aggravating when people talk about it online.
Yeah, yeah.
Again, personal trainers don't have the time to do some of these to make some of these mistakes,
that their mistakes are limited usually by time availability.
And the desires of their clients to be, you know, to feel.
Something that they think is effective and more upsets don't feel effective, which is.
Kind of what we'll tackle I think next week.
I'm excited about that one because I think as I said before when we were talking about this as a
series of two podcasts, I think I think the way that you've written your programs, the way you
design your programs is definitely you're successful on that front.
You've, you've kind of cracked the code in terms of delivering your clients things that they are
going to enjoy at the same time and feel valuable at the same time as actually being valuable.
How to manipulate manipulate the client into seeing results I was?
Phrasing it in a nice way.
I'll pick up next week.
Well, thank you everyone for joining us.
We will see you or you'll hear us more accurately in the new year.
O we do hope you'll join us again for another year and I hope or wish everyone a Happy New Year.