Episode: 044 How to write a fat loss training program
URL: https://open.spotify.com/episode/6K6WugdXtGCsDG4k5pIhQV
Published: 2026-03-23
================================================================================

Hello, everybody, welcome back to another episode.
Thank you for joining us for another episode of Hypertrophy Past and present.
And today we have no technological different differences, difficulties.
Goodness me, I can't even speak today.
No technological difficulties, but I've got some verbal difficulties going on.
Chris, I was listening to your podcast with Rob this week and I've I had a little bit of a giggle
because you obviously do this bit.
You introduce the podcast when you do your other podcast.
And I noticed that you never start the podcast by asking how Mcrob is doing.
And I always start by asking how you're doing.
And it became apparent to me that you probably hate it when I do that and that's why you don't
expose other people to it.
But nonetheless, I'm still going to do it.
So how are you doing today?
I'm OK under the circumstances.
Thank you.
OK, so before we jump into today's topic, we are, what are we doing?
We're reminding you all about a very exciting announcement that we made last week.
If you didn't listen to an episode last week, you won't know what it is.
And that is that we are launching A webinar certification course.
So go back to the listen last week because we need to talk about it a little bit more.
But we will be announcing more detail soon.
It's going to be a year long webinar series certification course which is in my form.
I'm sure there's a better way more assisting.
Well, it's a.
Certification, isn't it?
I mean, we're, we're doing a certification, it's advanced programming certification and it's based
on a series of webinars.
Well, that's how we're delivering the material, isn't it?
We're delivering the material using webinars because it's the most kind of efficient way for us to
deliver the material.
And it's also the best for the person who's receiving the information because they can perceive the
information either by attending or they can get the download afterwards.
So it works very.
Well, yeah.
And it allows us the opportunity to do more interactive stuff as well.
So we're in the certification process.
We are offering a between each webinar module, a topic.
We're going to have a tutorial webinar as well, So it'll be an opportunity for you guys who are
doing the certification.
You come on board, even present us just kept with case studies, we'll work through that.
So yeah, it's a little bit more interactive as well, so.
Totally.
Plenty of opportunity to ask questions.
I mean, that's the key thing.
It's enormous amount of access to our brains throughout the process, really.
Yeah, yeah.
And as we talked about last week, the goal here is really to present you guys with the tools to work
with the type of clients that you're likely to get as modern day coaches and PTS.
You know, it's everyone's done the fat loss stuff, everyone's done the, you know, hypertrophy one O
1 stuff.
And the goal of this webinar is not to give you the the foundational stuff that hopefully at this
point you've picked up elsewhere.
The goal is to give you the advanced.
From from this podcast, one would hope.
Yep, from the last you're.
You're the one who tracks.
You're the one who tracks the numbers I.
Know it's in the 40s so we haven't hit 50 yet, but we're getting.
Wow.
Yeah, 44, maybe something like that.
I mean, you guys are listening.
No, because it's virtually in the corner somewhere.
Wow.
Very close to Anyway, Yeah.
So the goal here with these webinars is to present you guys with the tools to work with, you know,
people who might be experiencing sleep issues and stress issues and gastrointestinal issues and
advanced clientele and athletes and power lifters and even, you know, enhanced lifters and people
who might be using peptides or maybe using GLP wands or all commando things you guys had likely to
be dealing with nowadays and maybe you weren't dealing with 10 years ago as a coach.
And yeah, to provide you guys, I guess the tools to succeed with those clients as well.
Anything you want to add?
So we were just going to add this week that we've had loads of questions about the project already
since our announcement last last week.
Most of the questions kind of come down to two important things.
Firstly, what is going to be the exact kind of content?
What's our list of planned topics?
And we're going to deliver that this week.
And we're going to get a a slide out on probably Instagram this week with all of those details.
So if you're curious about the exact nature of the course material that will be going out in the
next couple of days.
And then obviously the other kind of half the questions we get is people wanting to know how much is
it going to cost and what the kind of early bird discounts are going to be.
Well, we're not going to give you that this week.
We're going to give you that next week.
So keep an eye out for that.
And that information will be coming out very, very soon.
But yeah, in terms of course content next couple of days.
Yeah.
And we do have an e-mail list on both of our social media profiles, integrate profiles.
Make sure you do, if you haven't yet, sign up to that list, just pop your e-mail in there because it
is gonna be that's where the exclusive early bird discount is going to be.
And while we're not announcing all the prices yet, I can confirm that that is going.
To be we've just been plotting huge discounts, haven't we?
Before this podcast.
Huger than I was thinking of going so definitely.
I've pushed you pretty far on it.
OK, today's topic we are covering, what are we even calling today's topic?
So this come this is this topic is because it's the kind of single most common question I'm getting
at the moment.
Kind of either people are saying to me, please do a podcast about how the silver era bodybuilders
approached their programming during a dieting period.
So it's not so much asking about, you know, how they were dieting specifically, but just how they
were approaching programming during a dieting period.
And then obviously I also get lots of questions just about that from a physiological perspective.
How do we change our programs during a dieting period?
And I said, well, we can do both of those in the same podcast.
So you can do the bit on how people used to approach the programming during a a diet back then.
And then I can add a bit of Physiology and then we can hash out something together.
So programming during dieting, It's it's I'm making it sound like we came to this unprepared.
We're not we.
We did talk about, I just didn't know what the title.
Is you've just got a brain full of all kinds of other stuff, including all the course structures
that we've been plotting.
It's so, so silver area time story story time.
So when we talk about dieting and cutting and and what else do people call it?
I don't even know.
Definition, you told me, is what they call.
Well, that's what they call in the silver area, right?
So if you're looking for a silver area cutting plan or fat loss plan or whatever, you're not really
gonna find it.
What you'll find will be a defining plan, definition, plan defining.
Sometimes they will talk about reducing, like if somebody's overweight, then there'll be a reducing
plan.
And I think part of P, when you do this silver red stuff, this stuff is very much like a minority,
OK, there's not a lot of content on this.
I think there's two reasons for that.
One is most of what they were doing when it came to dieting was in fact the dieting.
And so they do talk about the nutrition component there.
And that kind of gets the spotlight when they're talking about this comprept dieting, cutting side
of things.
And then the second thing is, and we'll talk about this now, is that the training didn't really
change that much.
And so I don't think there was a huge emphasis on really talking about the training because they
kind of had the foundations in place that made a lot of sense.
So if you look at some of the guys who were talking about what they were doing, Steve Reeds, Reg
Parks, some of the more well known names and some who you know, they're writing magazines or writing
courses or whatever, there's a lot of, I would say a lot of consistency in how they were doing
things.
And I do want to dispel a bit of a myth because it's easy when you look online to make the
assumption that the way these guys were dieting or training for when they were dieting was using
heaps and heaps of volume.
And if you jump online, you look up still, I'm assuming I haven't tried it, but if you Google like
silver fat loss phase or whatever training, whatever, you're probably going to be hit with some
ridiculous volumes where I say, oh, Steve Reeves was doing, you know, 50 sets per workout and nine
sets of biceps and whatever else or Reg was doing, you know, 12 sets of biceps.
And they were and now we're doing that for the last two to four weeks before competition.
That was not their dieting training plan.
OK, They, they're clear about that.
They've like Reg talks in his books, hey, for two to four weeks before come on, before I go on a
stage, this is what I would do.
And now we're using that for fat loss.
Now we're using that literally as their physical activity.
But in the lead up to the getting on stage, that's not how they were training to actually achieve
definition fat loss, whatever.
So what we've got today is a Reg Park plan.
And this is going to look a little bit different.
So what I've done is I have taken Reg Park's specialization definition course and I've gone through
the recommendations he made because he basically gives 1A formula on how to write a defining plan.
And So what I've done is I've written a plan using exactly what he spelled out fast.
You're not going to find this exact workout in a book, in a magazine, whatever, but it's taken
directly from the the exercise suggestions he's given and the format that he's given.
So buckle in because it is a big one.
But it is literally exactly how he has described to do it.
So what he has suggested is when you are defining, it is important to not just jump up the volume.
He says a lot of people make this mistake.
They go heaps of sets, heaps of repetitions.
He goes no, no, no.
Definition comes from the variety of exercises one's doing, not from just doing more repetitions,
not from doing more sets, using a heavy load for a single set, for high variety of exercises.
So we we've got a restless bridge as our first exercise, which I don't know if we've talked about
before, maybe with some of the Drone 0 stuff we talked about.
I think we actually mentioned it last week incidentally, but this was a neck exercise.
Now in in Reg's later work, he didn't really do this, but at this point when he wrote this book, he
did suggest it.
So restless bridge for a single set.
Then we've got a standing dumbbell lateral raise for a single set, a standing front raise with a
dumbbell for a single set, a barbell curl.
Now he did say he can do this either strict or cheating.
He did use both.
And then dumbbell concentration curls, dumbbell incline curls.
He did do quite a lot of curling, so he did suggest sort of usually about 3 different curling
exercises in these routines.
Then an easy bass skull crusher, he called it a triceps curl, but basically it's what we would call
a skull crusher today.
And then a standing dumbbell triceps extension dips, which he did say you could either do on the
parallel bars or you could do on the bench.
Then a flat dumbbell fly, a pullover, which usually he would do after the squat but I've ordered it
in the the muscle groups.
But you could move this after the squat.
And then a wide grip barbell bench, a bent over barbell row.
He didn't specify hand position.
He normally did fairly close grip when he was doing that in sagittal plane.
A barbell shrug, a lap pull down.
Once again he didn't specify hand position there.
Stiff leg deadlift, these are all single sets, a deep knee bend, which is a squat, iron boot, leg
extensions, a standing car phrase with the barbell, but obviously you could do that with a machine
nowadays.
And then concluding with ABS, well, he called it waist, which was sit ups and leg raises.
Now, once again, all of this was done for single sets.
We've got 21 exercises here, so 21 sets in total.
And he did talk about sort of moderate repetitions, you know, somewhere around that 10 repetitions
per set mark and SH short, like somewhat incomplete rest periods.
But he wasn't suggesting just going, you know, flat out one exercise to the next.
But he did use shorter rest periods.
It's a bit of a mammoth plan.
What do you think of that?
So, yeah, I mean there's lots of important things here to to emphasise on that.
I mean, first of all, there's an enormous emphasis here on exercise variety and very little emphasis
on volume per exercise.
So clearly there's a kind of a, an interest here in reducing the amount of fatigue that each kind of
set of MUSS fibers they're experiencing.
Similarly, there's also a kind of emphasis on targeting as many MUSS fibers as possible.
So really, really interesting kind of viewpoint here or approach here because it's essentially
saying and and this is presumably done kind of three times a week I'm guessing.
Yes, which is a very important point because he's and that's why I think they don't talk so much
about these cutting plans that much because their default is using high variety 3 * a week.
Yeah.
So basically it's making sure that there's very, very little chance of any muscle fibre that's being
trained at any point in the program from experiencing atrophy, because it's getting hit pretty much
at the end of every SIM, every stimulus period that's going on.
So, yeah, high chance of avoiding atrophy, obviously less stimulus per session, but you know, that's
probably a good thing if you're not really able to achieve an enormous amount of kind of growth in
that period of time anyway.
So very, very cool kind of basic structure straight away in terms of excise selection.
I mean, kind this is kind of half youth, half Reg, isn't it?
I mean, it's like you're kind of it.
Is So what I did just for context for people listening?
So he split it up into muscle grips and he gave around maybe 5 exercise suggestions.
So they're they're his, they're his exercises, but you've picked them.
So it's kind of like I've.
Picked the first option, two to three per muscle group that he recommended.
Really.
OK.
So this isn't you like kind of deliberately picking the best ones?
No it's not.
No, I literally missed the first ones.
You.
Recommend that that.
In which case that's actually a lot better than I thought.
I think I thought you'd have to go hunting for these.
No, I was tempted, but no, I did not configure this.
OK, wow.
No, this is actually then a lot better than I expected it to be.
And that also explains one or two of the slightly odd choices, but OK, cool.
What do you just just for clarity then starting at the top, what do you think the restless bridge is
actually training or is he just kind of doing it as a bit of a warm up there?
Yeah.
I mean, look, obviously they, they talk about this as a neck exercise and he gave other alternatives
as a neck exercise.
There is going to be some hip involvement in it because they are using a barbell usually.
So I've never experimented with it myself to see kind of what kind of neck stimulus one does seem to
get, but.
I'm certainly not going to try at my age.
So yeah, leave that one for somebody else who's a lot braver than I am.
OK, cool.
Understood.
So basically we've got, we've got some single joint stuff for the shoulders.
Actually whether the front raise is more of a clavicular Peck is a separate question.
But curls, we've got 3 variations of curls, a little bit of variety there in terms of the regions.
Obviously incline is going to get a little bit maybe more of the biceps, maybe the if it's a
cheating curl, you might get a little bit more bracci radialis.
I'm not sure what the concentration curls are going to do.
You know, yeah, just on the curls, because that's been a a topical conversation this week and people
have been arguing a lot about do you need different curls, just one curl going to do it.
And and I thought, you know what, I'm going to go back and look at what the Silver area guys said.
I had a bit of a suspicion, but I thought, let's just get some good data here.
And I went back to all, like all of Reggie's advance plans, I went back to Steve's plans, I went
back to, to John Grimek and what he was talking about.
And there was actually consistency in each.
And these are the, the first, second, third Mr. Universes, right?
And literally all of them said to do a curl that had essentially a, a flexed shoulder position.
They all had either a neutral shoulder position or extended shoulder position curl.
And they all had a unilateral curl.
And all of them are saying they're doing 3 different curls was their preferred way of of training
and advanced arms.
So they're actually definitely coming down hard on the side of variety then for elbow flexor
training.
That's that's a really important data point because like you've been saying, there is a trend for
the moment people to react against our our kind of biggest arms ever kind of episode.
And Spain basically you just need to do curls and you forget about any kind of variety.
Now, sure.
I mean, like I am just going to do a single curl variation.
I mean, I'm not interested in kind of maximizing my kind of arm size at this point in my life.
But yeah, I think if you're aiming for high level bodybuilding success, I don't see how one curl
variation is going to do it if you want to stay natural at least.
So, yeah, but just kind of like a very quick rabbit hole on that particular issue.
Ultimately, let's just kind of start by saying, OK, where where are these opinions coming from?
I mean, everybody has obviously their own opinion about kind of what good exercises are for each
muscle group.
But ultimately, there are only really two valid ways of justifying an A set of opinions or an
opinion.
Either you can have a physiological model that says this is how I think the brain allocates motor
recruitment and activates muscle fibers so that they are exposed to active and passive mechanical
tension.
So please don't tell me that you can just use passive tension and you don't need to have activation
of the fibers because unless you're doing a static stretch, you do.
So how are you applying that motive signal and and exposing the fibers to active and passive
mechanical tension?
And then you can start to basically make arguments about how these muscles are going to experience
growth depending on the excise selection that you are kind of arguing for.
So I'm going, OK, I think that the bisys back are going to be activated most in this position.
I think the brachialis in this position and the brachialis in the other position.
And here is the kind of protocol or the framework that I'm arguing for that justifies that it is a
Physiology based framework.
I'm arguing from the basis of neuro mechanical matching.
And here are the kind of momentum data kind of points that I've collected and the long term training
studies that fit in with that kind of model.
So you can either do that, you can either say this is a physiological model that I'm arguing for.
And to my knowledge, there's only one available physiological model that has any kind of legs right
now.
And this is the neuro mechanical matching model.
Everybody else is arguing against it, but they don't have their own arguing for it.
So, but ultimately what I'm seeing at the moment is like you've got literally 1 available
physiological model.
If you haven't got that, the only thing you've then got is outcome studies.
So all you can then do is say these are the outcome studies and I'm going to kind of analyse all of
them and tell you what I think, you know each exercise is likely to do based on those long term
studies.
Well, we're not very far away from having AI do that for you.
So the reality is that either you can kind of go down the new mechanical matching model argument and
say this is what I think exercises are going to do and that will kind of give you an answer.
Or you can go down the route of saying, I'm just going to be an outcome kind of devotee and I'm just
going to tell you what the outcome studies say.
Now, to be honest, if you're just going to get on the outcome studies route as a kind of to find the
best exercises for the elbow flexors, you are going to be swimming in a lot of very, very murky
water because they are very, very kind of contradictory in general.
But I think you can kind of figure out a way through it if you apply the neural mechanical matching
lens and it kind of steers you towards saying, well, those studies probably aren't like in line with
it.
So therefore, they're probably not right.
But these studies are in line with it and they do support it.
And that kind of gives you a reasonably confident output as long as you kind of have other reasons
to accept the neural mechanical matching is slightly correct.
You just have to be a little bit kind of have a filter to start with, which is kind of the model
that you've decided to wear with.
But basically those are the only two options.
So when people are saying, oh, no, no, no, I think that these exercises are best for the LF flexism,
like, yeah, but which approach are you taking?
Are you taking a physiological model approach and saying this is how I think things work and
therefore these are the exercises that I think will work best?
Or are you saying I'm just pausing the outcome studies and I'm kind of navigating a route through
those based on what we call evidence?
So ultimately you've either got a science based approach or you've got an evidence based approach.
As I've said many, many times before, science based is basically trying to figure out how things
work and then go from there.
Evidence based is just saying what the outcome studies say and then trying to figure out what the
what the kind of appropriate exercise would be based on those.
And I don't think that you can actually do it based on outcome studies.
So I guess really for all the people who are making a lot of noise about this at the moment, I would
say tell me which of those two approaches you're taking and justify what your answers are, because I
don't see anybody who is giving an alternative physiological explanation.
Yeah, I think that's true.
And I think what's interesting with the outcome based approach is, and you know, we've talked about
this when we talk about things like splits, when we talk about volume, is so much of the details get
missed entirely in the outcomes, right?
And you know, whether that's because of duration, whether that's because of sample size or whatever.
And So what you see with people who are then aligning themselves purely with outcomes is everything
becomes diminished and suddenly kind of nothing really matters like it.
It just defaults back to lowest common denominator.
We can see it doesn't matter that much.
It doesn't matter that much.
Exercise reality doesn't matter that much.
Nothing really matters that much.
There's a number of problems and that's that's, and that's an interesting kind of umbrella that sits
across all of them.
Really the problem is that if you want to do this job that we do, I guess if you want to do this
kind of like kind of analysis that we do, then if you want to do it purely based on outcome studies,
you actually have to include every single one.
You can't do it without including every single one.
Because the whole point of relying on outcome studies is that your entire evidence base is not how
things work, but what data says from a long term perspective.
So if somebody is posting like an Instagram post and they're saying, oh, look, these two studies
show this outcome based information and like just swipe away because ultimately every, every single
kind of analysis like that has to include every single study.
Otherwise it's, it's garbage.
Whereas if we're going from a, a model, then we say, look, this is what the model says.
If you have an outcome study that slightly disagrees with that, it's more likely that the outcome
study is wrong than that every single study showing that this model works, which of which there are
dozens, you know, is it is wrong.
So if you start with a, a kind of a understanding of what the model is and the physiological
reality, and then, yeah, you've got a bunch of outcome studies that largely sit with that, fine, OK.
If a couple of them don't, well, you know, they're probably wrong.
Whereas if you just literally doing it from an evidence based point of view, you can't do that.
You have to include every single study.
So straight away it's actually misleading to post a couple of outcome studies and say, oh, look,
these couple of outcome studies show this thing that I believe, therefore it's right.
Like, no, dude, you have to show every single one if you want to do it from an outcomes perspective.
Otherwise it's a garbage analysis.
And then as you say, what happens is if you literally just do it from an outcome perspective, you
end up with an incredibly murky situation because you don't know which of these studies is more
likely to be correct and which one is more likely to be true.
You literally just have to base it on statistical kind of factors and go, well, this study had these
statistical features.
So it's more likely to be, you know, and that's what we do when we do metro analysis.
We have a process called weighting.
Basically you weight studies according to their kind of what you perceive to be their statistical
validity.
And you give those studies heavier weights because you think they're more likely to be true.
It doesn't mean actually that they are more likely to be true, but that's a separate question.
So, but anyway, you end up with a kind of very, very murky picture, which, as you say, flattens out
the kind of subtleties and and wrinkles that actually might be very informative for you to
understand how things work.
So you just end up with this very, very muddy picture, which is like, yeah, strength training works.
I'm like, yes, we know that strength training works.
I've said this many, many times, number of times people come on my kind of social media and say, oh,
so you're saying that, you know, kind of this kind of works or that works.
And I'm like, yeah, strength training works.
Like, but what we're trying to get at here is what works slightly better.
And you can't do it with outcome study for the reasons that you're just saying it just it's too
murky, it's too flat as a, as a data set.
You just end up squeezing out all of the all of the subtleties and all of the interesting bits.
Yeah, I think that's a really good framework to be working off when you're looking online at what
you're seeing.
Educators post is thinking to yourself, what lens are they coming at this front?
Is it Physiology or is it just outcome based?
Are you trying to understand how it works and then go from there or are you just saying, you know
it's evidence?
It's just a list of outcome studies.
If you're going down the list of outcome studies, you need all of them.
You can't do it with just three.
And that's what most science based kind of evidence based kind of what social media posting is at
the moment in, in, in, in, in the area that we're we're in.
It's just people posting a couple of studies and saying, look, this is what these studies say.
I'm like, yeah, well, what about the other 17 that you didn't talk about?
You can't do evidence based without having every single study doesn't make sense.
Whereas if you've got a physiological model, then you know you've started from a position of, of, of
having some knowledge about the way things work.
And then, yeah, you can be a little bit more relaxed about your outcome studies because they're not
as important.
So where were we?
So we were going through the list of exercises that you identified as the first couple in each
section.
We got to curls.
That's that's it.
And we got to curls and I was kind of having a rant about how there is a lot of pushback on the
episode that we did about how to get the biggest arms ever.
And I pointed out that most of the pushback is, is rubbish because it just starts from either people
trying to argue that Physiology works without actually having a validated model.
They just go, oh, well, we think that, you know, the active linked tension relationship governs
where the brain sends activation.
I'm like, OK, we've got a study that like demonstrates that model happening.
I'm like, oh, no, no, no, no, we just think it, I'm like, OK, well, it's probably not happening.
Then, you know, you've got tons of studies showing that the neurochemical matching principle is
validated and that's what I'm working with.
I'm not working with a oh, I thought that I'm working with a this is a validated model, so there
isn't another validated model.
So Physiology has a new mechanical matching model and that's it.
It doesn't have another one.
Whereas, you know, evidence based.
Again, people are just throwing a couple of studies out there and going, oh, I think this because of
that study, I'm like, well yeah, cool, but what about the other 17?
So anyway, in terms of tricep stuff, he's kind of doing a, he's doing two different shoulder
positions, but he's not doing a standing one, is he?
Unless you argue really that the Dips is kind of doing that job.
So his skull crusher, skull crusher is going to be at 90° shoulder angle.
His triceps extensions are probably going to be kind of with a hand behind the head.
And then his Dips, I guess is probably doing the role of the shoulder position in the sort of
anatomical or slightly behind the anatomical.
So you could argue that the Dips is doing that.
But again, Dips has got some shoulder movement in there.
But yeah.
And again.
Solid, solid exercise variety really.
I mean, all of this is really good.
I mean, like look at the PEC stuff.
I mean he's got kind of dumbbell fly pullovers, you know, sort of definitely coastal PEC really.
And then why grip bench is really duplicating the dumbbell fly.
I would say there's not really much kind of difference between those laps, sagittal plus kind of
maybe frontal if it's a lap pull down and then he's got shrugs in there for the traps.
Nice to see hamstrings work in the program, but there's only really the one exercise, stiff leg
deadlift.
I mean, obviously.
If yeah, he, he, he basically just gave deadlift variations there as options.
So I just selected one because I don't, I've never seen Reg program multiple deadlifts in the same
land.
So I don't.
I don't think that would have.
Been, but I'm not even sure multiple deadlifts would make a lot of sense.
Anyway, I mean it all, they all kind of do very similar things.
Squats and the extensions obviously really solid, kind of good coverage for the quads car phrase.
Presumably that is a standing one, but again, probably my selection if you've only got 1 car phrase
and then I don't tend to comment on AB work.
But again, you know, sort of interesting the fact that he's got 2 exercises rather than one.
I mean, yeah, this is really kind of, this is really kind of very, very similar to many of the
things we've talked about before where we look at a program and go given the constraints of the
equipment that they had available to them and, you know, given the constraints of what acts, what
knowledge they had access to, this is absolutely fantastic.
You know, I mean, it really is absolutely fantastic.
If you were to do, I mean, obviously you might strip out the rest of this bridge because it's
probably quite dangerous.
You might you might strip out like you might strip out kind of the dumbbell fly because you're kind
of duplicating it with the bench.
You might strip out one of the biceps curves in this list because it probably is duplicating.
You might strip out the AB work and get it down to maybe sort of 18 or so exercises.
Single sets, moderately heavy loads, 8 to 10 probably.
Well, yeah, we can kind of hash that out in a minute when we do our perfect version.
But, you know, honestly, this would be better than almost anything else you're going to see online.
Or it's, I mean, like just so much better.
Just so much better.
Ridiculously good, doing this three times a week and moderately heavy loads, single sets, Really,
really, really, really solid kind of routine.
I'm just, it's just so impressive when you kind of look at this and you see how good it was at that
time and then you look at what's going on today and you go, what we're doing today is absolute
nonsense.
I mean, not what we're doing, but what the vast majority of the industry is doing right now is
absolute nonsense compared to what these guys would do.
Yeah.
And you know, this is so similar to what Steve Reeves was doing as well.
Like the plan itself is Steve had a few additional exercises, but the format is obviously almost
identical.
And he was doing single sets.
He was doing usually three exercises per muscle group.
This is sort of two to three exercises.
And you know, obviously he had more total exercises in the workout plan, but very, very similar.
I really really solid.
I mean, like almost always when we do one of these program reviews, I'm like, it's not bad, at
least.
I mean, it's at least not bad.
I mean, you could do worse.
And then sometimes you come across something like this and it's just like, wow, this is just really
good.
You know, really, really good.
Like, I would literally just be arguing details around specific exercises.
I wouldn't really be changing anything else.
Yeah, yeah.
So what do you think?
Because I look at a plan like this and I think, yeah, you could run this all the time.
This is great.
You could, you could actually run this all the time.
So that really kind of is, is then asking the question, well, what is changing about being in a
calorie deficit?
That means that we might want to change the training program.
So I mean, that's, that's kind of like the question that we need to answer.
And you know, when people have been asking us to do this topic on the podcast, I was kind of A, at
first, I was a little bit like kind of, well, we've done this already.
You know, we've done two kind of, I think we've done 2 full episodes on what calorie deficits do in
terms of affecting your recovery rates and also in terms of affecting, you know, the baseline level
of muscle growth that's going to happen.
So the atrophy, hypertrophy, balance.
But, you know, again, people want a more practical conversation.
So let me just whiz through what's happening in a a kind of calorie deficit and then we'll come back
to building our own program.
I think, I think that'll probably be cool.
So very, very quickly when we go into a calorie deficit, we are going to experience a drop in the
baseline levels of muscle protein synthesis and that is going to negatively affect our rates of
repair and also our kind of sort of net kind of anabolic status.
So we're going to experience a reduction in the kind of ability to maintain fibres we've got and
also obviously therefore in the amount of benefit that we're going to get from individual workouts.
So essentially we are going to see a slow down in growth and potentially to the point where it
starts to produce atrophy.
And we're going to see this is assuming we're doing strength training.
So assuming we're doing a strength training program, we're going to start to see a reduction in
growth from the workouts we're doing.
And that's going to be because both of the suppression of the baseline in the area around the
workouts of the stimulus period and also obviously in the kind of periods outside that which we
would call dissipation or atrophy periods.
So essentially the entirety of Amos protein synthesis kind of level is going to just go downwards
and that is again also then going to affect our recovery ability from previous from each individual
workout.
So we're going to find that we can't do as much volume.
We can't do as you know kind of many sort of reps close to failure as we were doing previously or
any of the other kind of variables, eccentric stuff and kind of higher repetitions or anything like
that.
So we're going to see those two negative things happening and the reality is it's fairly dose
responsive.
So I said before that if you put, if your body perceives the calorie deficit as a stressor, you are
going to push into a state where you are going to be losing muscle mass pretty much no matter what
you're doing because you will have a very large glucocortical response from that stressor.
And then everything is just going to go in the opposite direction.
So you're going to see a big increase in muscle protein breakdown rates and you're going to see a
big suppression of muscle protein synthesis.
And then like what we've got with the metro analysis of chloride restriction during strength
training programs, you're going to get over and they kind of saw on average around about sort of 500
calorie deficits a day.
You kind of tip over into a state where you're probably losing muscle mass even though you're
conducting a strength training program.
So I would argue that number probably varies between people depending on how their body perceives
the stressor.
And it also probably varies a little bit depending on the strength training programme because many
of the strength training programmes done in research aren't ideal.
They tend not to have a high enough frequency, they tend to have too much volume.
So you probably could do a little bit better if your programme was, you know, kind of more like the
one we've just been talking about South ultimately.
And, and I guess just in terms of small details, I'm not going to do a full on physiological review
right now.
I'm just giving the headlines.
But in terms of small details, I just want to add that yes, protein content will make a little bit
of a difference.
We do see that if people are kind of not or in animal models as well.
If the protein levels are low and you add a little bit of protein back in, you do start to see both
faster recovery after muscle damage, whether it's exercise or non exercise injury.
And you also see a little bit of a kind of protective effect in terms of kind of muscle growth.
But that isn't an absolute kind of, you know, kind of universal effect across the entire spectrum of
deficits.
So if you get towards the sort of higher deficit and it starts to be perceived as a stressor, then
it really doesn't matter what the protein content of the diet is.
You are going to experience a drop in kind of mussoprotein synthesis regardless.
The sensitivity of the body to that dietary protein reduces dramatically and you just don't get the
benefit of that.
So you can't kind of say, well, I'm just going to eat, you know, nothing but tins of tuna and hope
for I mean, I know that some of these guys did, but you know, you can't just eat 10s of tuna and
hope for the best.
It isn't going to work like that because the the to certain calorie deficit, the body starts
perceiving as a stressor and you're just going to, it's just going to ignore the fact that it's kind
of protein and you're not going to get that kind of protective effect on muscle size.
So, and there's some really good human data in that and some really good animal data in that.
It's fairly universal.
So can't really kind of sort of tuna our way out to the problem.
So that's it.
I don't, I don't want to do a whole kind of review on the Physiology today.
We've done 2 episodes if you want to look back and we've done the calorie deficit one on recovery.
I think we've definitely done the calorie deficit one on atrophy, full on kind of physiological
reviews.
And I don't want to do that.
Let's talk about how we might structure a training, a strength training kind of programme based on,
on that those, those effects.
So if we look at this program that we've got in front of us from Reg, I think that's an amazing
starting point.
But, and, and the reason I think it's an amazing starting point is because what I would always want
to do is train as frequently as possible with the minimum amount of fatigue and hit as many Moss
fibres as I possibly can.
So I'd want to do a full body A, a, A rather than a full body AB because I want to have that really,
really high frequency and I'd want to try and get as much variety as in as I can.
So I'd need to be doing single sets to get that high variety.
Now, you've already pointed out you might program like that anyway, and there's no reason you
couldn't.
Yeah.
So I I wonder why did they identify that this was more important when they were cutting than when
they were bulky or when they weren't?
Sure, sure, sure do.
You have any?
Because I, I suspect part of it would simply be you're not going to get more motor unit recruitment
per SE in doing those same exercises for multiple sets.
But what you are going to get when you're not cutting is potentially higher baseline level of motor
unit recruitment.
Yeah, there's going to be high levels of motivation, there's going to be less fatigue, etcetera.
So is it more important to choose higher variety?
Because you're at a bit of a, there's a detriment there anyway in terms of Modi unit recruitment.
And so you need to have tools to enhance Modi unit recruitment that you don't maybe need as much
when you're not dieting.
I wonder if that's maybe the mentality they're obviously they're not thinking about it in those
terms, but I'm trying to work out why else would they think this was more important when they were
dieting?
I think one of the things that you told me in the past, which kind of stuck in my head was that they
definitely saw exercise variety as something that created shape and kind of appearance rather than
just bulk.
So I think what and I think what's happening is as they lose body fat, they are kind of then seeing
better obviously kind of definition.
And as a result, exercise variety starts to become much more interesting because you can see the
differences.
I mean, like if if you've got a level of body that's a bit high, you can't really see necessarily
the shape and the difference that happens from two different elbow flexor exercises, you know, or a
couple of different back exerciser, a couple, you know, kind of delta exercise.
You can't see what's changing.
It's just like hidden.
So I wonder whether actually it's just kind of that because they were in a period of time when they
were able to see the kind of shapes that the muscles were forming underneath the skin, you kind of
become attracted to doing exercises that make different parts of the kind of muscle become more
visible.
It could be that simple.
Yeah, potentially it sounds viable.
Yeah.
And you know, it's worth noting as well that like I mentioned with Steve Grieves, his plan, which
was almost identical to this, was not just a dieting plan.
So obviously there were bodybuilders who were training in this way.
I mean, you know, Grimmick obviously did very similar.
Most Hoffman stuff was very similar, single sets, many exercises.
So it's not like they were saying, you know, you only do this when you're dieting.
It just so happened that Reg tended to do multi sets.
And when he was dieting, he did say, hey, I recommend these single sets.
Yeah, yeah.
I mean really kind of when you look at sort of The Reg programmes which have that are designed more
for kind of you know kind of non dieting periods, I guess they tend to have fewer exercises.
They tend to be multi joint stuff and he's kind of training more like a power builder, so he's
almost.
Like in power, Yeah, very clearly would use those terms, yeah.
Yeah.
So it's kind of like he's training for kind of, it's almost like you're saying this part of the year
he's training for strength and maybe even thinking about his numbers more than he is kind of what he
looks like.
Which is fair because he was obviously working towards sure £500 bench.
Sure, exactly.
So it like, it's almost like his goals change.
And so then he kind of goes into this period of time when so maybe the, as they call it, the word
definition kind of period is not really kind of perfectly lined up or continuous with a cutting
period.
It's just that this is what period of time when he's thinking more like a bodybuilder and less like
a strength athlete.
So the reality is that definition and diet may not be perfectly coterminous terminologies.
They may just kind of be so slightly kind of coterminous.
They're just or simultaneous.
They're just kind of like, yeah, the definition period starts here as you start training like a
bodybuilder.
And then at some point in that period of time, he switches over to dieting because that's obviously
the purpose of the sport, to end up with a low body fat or so that that mean that may be the the way
to see it.
So in the reality, then this wouldn't necessarily be a true kind of dieting plan.
It would literally just be a bodybuilding plan.
Yeah.
Essentially it's.
Which is see how we're seeing it, which is kind of how we're seeing.
But that's actually true because the reality is there isn't really a kind of, I mean, honestly,
there isn't really a way to avoid.
I mean, yeah, there isn't really a way to avoid doing all the exercises that you need to do.
I mean, if you are dieting, you need to make sure that you're not experiencing atrophy very much.
And you need to make sure that you are targeting therefore, all the muscle fibers that you are
trying to develop.
And that means you need a full list of exercises.
You need to do those three times a week, and you want to do them without creating a large amount of
fatigue.
So you need to keep the loads heavy or moderately heavy.
I mean, really, like we were saying, apart from adjusting some of the exercises, like if we were
kind of rewriting this, we would probably have, I mean, do you want to just follow this through in
terms of the muscle groups as they listed?
So if you're starting out then with side delt, nothing wrong with a lateral raise, although I would
probably prefer a machine just for the stability, but I don't have a problem with lateral raise.
Yeah, yeah, I'm programming a lot of cable lateral raises at the moment, yeah.
In terms of that front raise, I'm not sure that that would be my kind of preference.
I'd rather have an overhead press partial range of motion for the front delt.
Yeah, I know you're not a fan of that exercise.
It's one I've actually been playing with myself lately and I do quite like it, especially if you're
doing it in a seat position, alternating or single arm at a time.
But it's not one I've programmed a lot in the past.
So I would normally do like a sagittal plane overhead there.
Yeah.
No, I think that and if it's partial, then you're definitely guaranteeing some really solid anterior
adult involvement in terms of curls.
We literally did the episode on this, you know, kind of a couple of weeks ago.
So obviously incline cable curl, incline match, cable curl, preach curl and kind of something for
the Brachydialis, whatever that might be.
I like which.
Is one thing I would point out that a lot of these silly guys did not.
They talked about it during reverse grip curls, but I never see them programmed them very often.
But again, if you are using barbells and dumbbells, you're getting a lot of brachydialis anyway.
In terms of triceps, yeah, I mean I would if I'm programming, you know, more than one exercise
triceps, it's probably going to be a standing triceps push down and dips if if people are happy with
those but not.
Yeah.
I mean, you think we could just get rid of one of these because, well, maybe the skull crusher, I
mean that we would change for a cable push down and then really maybe keep the dips in.
I would.
Personally keep.
The dips, but again, oh, we certainly don't need another one.
But again, it really depends on what people feel comfortable with.
Not everybody's comfortable doing dips, but.
Yeah, in very mind, if you've got a sagittal plane overhead, obviously you're getting decent
triceps.
You're getting similar that as well.
Totally totally.
So it definitely doesn't need 3 in terms of chest.
I mean, wide grid Brent is going to be really, really solid option as is dumbbell fly or machine
kind of fly.
I'm not sure I really need anything else, to be honest, unless, you know, unless it's a particular
personal weakness that somebody has.
I mean, that's kind of why I like the shunt race to be honest, because you like getting at least a
little bit there too, like both delts and chess.
Yeah, the totally, totally viable.
The pullover is an interesting addition here.
Yeah, yeah.
I mean, again, I think this is kind of one of those areas where you have to kind of look at the
person and see what their weaknesses are and what kind of physique they want to develop.
You know, I, I actually kind of really like better that sort of bronze, silver era kind of physique
over the kind of later golden era physique where kind of people look like they're walking around
with cushions shoved up their T-shirts.
I mean, it looks a little bit kind of weird to me, but you know, everybody's got their own
preferences kind of into back really.
I wouldn't have a barbell row.
But then that this is an equipment limitation.
I think, you know, I think really we would program kind of a size to playing Rd. probably with a
machine, I mean, but yeah.
Or if you can't use machine, you would at least do that, maybe with a dumbbell or bent over 1
dumbbell.
Yeah, probably.
Barbell Row is just horrid for kind of stability.
It just moves you around all over the place.
So then yeah, I would probably then just do a Kelso because I'd be sitting in the machine that would
allow me to do a Kelso that pulled down.
Obviously fine.
Probably wouldn't program deadlifts.
Honestly, I'd probably just because they take a lot of setting up and energy to do, especially in a
dieting period.
I'd probably program the two hamstring variations, leg curl in a seated position, leg curl and a
lying position, honestly, just because they're so easy in a calorie deficit.
I would only do that if I knew I had a squat in as well.
Otherwise, like we've talked about in the past, I want some kind.
Of or a leg press or do.
You do you think so?
I specifically want some kind of hip hinging type like weighted exercise.
OK.
To get maybe some of the, you know, erectors or just some of that muscular child that you may not be
getting with these isolated exercises.
In which case stiff leg would be my favorite to do that because I think it is quickest to set up.
Yeah.
So I would only.
Curve that as a stiff like drag pool.
Sure.
And honestly that is probably the fastest 1 to get through in the least offensive from our energy
point of view, I would guess.
I certainly would not do a squat in preference to that.
But again, you know, whatever is easier.
But yeah, I think we're on the same wavelength there, really.
So then, yeah, I would probably have a leg.
If you're doing that stiff leg, then obviously your alternative will be in the lying leg because
you're stiff leg and your line leg are going to give you kind of good kind of carry over or not
carry over complementary muscle groups.
Yeah, Synergy, that's the one.
And then obviously leg press I would probably have and then the extensions and then standing calf
raise.
Yeah.
I mean, but again, we're not changing this massively.
I mean it's you could.
Probably throw a glute exercise in there.
Of course.
Yeah, obviously you'd need, you'd need something for glutes.
He's not got any glute in there.
We should have said that, shouldn't we?
It's just with one or two a hipster and I said an abduction, you'd have that.
Yeah, well, truly covered.
You would have basically everything at that point.
Yeah, yeah.
One thing that he did say that I didn't mention, which I think is really interesting point is he
said you can add more exercises to this.
He said if you will get this, he goes, but if you add more, what you may want to do then is split it
up and train six days a week instead of three days a week.
Which is probably our one of our most popular podcast episodes ever #3 that we did, I think.
And I think that becomes more interesting in the con in the context of dieting, because motivation
levels are probably gonna drop.
Your ability to do 2025 different exercises in a session is probably gonna be more limited than when
you're well fed.
And so it probably does make sense at that point to maybe split it up.
Yeah, totally.
Yeah, Yeah.
And to be honest, it's still a question that I get.
And I think we covered this really, really well in that podcast episode that we did.
Was it Clancy Ross?
I think we described his his approach to it.
But yeah, I mean, totally, you could split this up into two, two kind of workouts, 10 exercises,
single sets, you know, however you really wanted to do it honestly.
I mean, I wouldn't kind of have anything that was overlapping too much, so I wouldn't have.
No, he Reg talked, I think he said suggested from memory, I think he suggested starting with having
your AB work on the other day and then I forget what he suggested adding on to it.
But yeah, I mean for me, when I split stuff like this, and I don't do it often, but if someone has
access to a home gym or something like that and just works better for them, I'd often actually take
out the quads and I'll put the quads on as their own little mini workout on those alternate days.
I find generally there's not going to be a whole stack of overlap, maybe with glutes, but that's
about it.
But I find most other muscles are going to be a little bit difficult to have no overlap if you're
doing 6 consecutive days.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
I mean, especially if you're doing the kind of the stiff leg deadlift variation, then you kind of
are going to end up feeling everything the following day.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
So the, I guess your framework we're working here with is single sets, high variety.
We're saying low to moderate repetitions.
And I like that he's talked about these moderate reps because obviously I've made this well known in
the past.
I like that idea of not having to do heaps and heaps of warm up sets.
If someone can get away with doing 5 or 6 repetitions without warm up sets, go for gold.
I struggled.
Last time we talked about this, it was exercise specific, wasn't it?
I mean, that's, that's what it comes down to.
I mean, like I can literally sit down in a number of machines and do two or three warm up reps and
then I can do a set of 6 no problem at all.
But not on every machine.
It's just a couple of machines like.
So I think everybody's going to have their own kind of specific set of machines that that is doable
on.
And then the rest you maybe have to drift up to 8 to 10.
And I think you just have to kind of work with what what you're comfortable with.
Which I think is an important point because if you were to write out this plan, if I was to write
this plan out as it is with the 2020 exercises or whatever, I would either I would do one or two
things.
If I was giving it to a client, I would actually say I want you to do, I would probably say 5 to 12
repetitions, which is a huge range.
And I would communicate that and say basically I want you to do as few as possible that you feel
good doing.
It doesn't take heaps and heaps.
That's exactly right.
That's exactly right, yeah.
And for me, if I was doing this plan, some of those exercises I'd be doing 5 or 6 repetitions and
some of them I'd be doing 11:50.
I can almost always make it with eight to 10.
But yeah, I see what you're doing there.
I mean, yeah, no, I mean, that's it.
It's just there's going to be some exercises when it's totally possible and somewhere it just feels
utterly miserable.
And I mean, but this is actually a really good, really important point, a really good opportunity to
make a very important point.
So, you know, physiologically, from a recovery point of view, kind of four to six repetitions is
always going to be the best zone to be working in.
I mean, it just that's just physiologically how it is.
But practically there are quite meaningful implications of doing that, which you've pointed out,
which is that you some exercises we're going to need to really stack in an extra substantial number
of warm up reps and faff around with, you know, kind of setting the machine up the way you want to
and even fetching plates and carrying them across the rib.
You are going to end up putting more energy in than you are saving by focusing on that really tight
repetition.
I've had people talk to me and say, Oh, I'm always trying to stay in that four to six or even
they've even said to me, I'm always trying to stay around 5:00 and I'm using micro plates to load.
And I'm like, OK, this is taking these a little bit far and also neglecting that really important
practical implication side, which is that if it's costing you more to do that, then it's not worth
doing it.
You know, kind of like take this as an overall kind of investment of your energy and go, you know,
is it easier for me to just do a set of eight reps or 9 reps or 10 reps and then move on to the next
thing or, you know, than it is kind of trying to really finesse things to make sure that I land on
the 5-6 kind of reps zone.
But it's cost me extra warm up reps, It's cost me walking around the gym fetching place.
It's cost me setting the machine up and getting the the situation the way I want it and all that
kind of thing.
Let's not like forget those are all costs as well.
We have to take all those around.
Well, you know, sometimes people will send me plans.
They'll send me, you know, screenshots of other plans or whatever and I'll see it and it's it'll be
like, you know, standing car ferry sets of five.
And I'm like, OK, for some people, fine, that'll work.
Like God, I would have to use two different gym pins and go steal, you know, 8 different 20K plates
and make that work.
And to give that to if you know the client, you're just.
Going to have a have a jump on following around sitting on the machine.
Collecting weights.
Exactly.
And holding weights at the same time, yeah.
Yeah, yeah.
I mean, you look at these silver area guys and sometimes, you know, they jump on.
People's back, little guys sitting there else.
Yeah, yeah, exactly.
And indiscriminately just give that out and say, look, everyone should do sets of five.
It's like, well, should they?
Is that is that really going to work for everyone?
I don't know that it's going to be.
I mean, you do seated, seated deduction.
Doesn't matter how many weights you strap on that.
Like for me I wouldn't be able to make that heavy enough.
Instead of five, maybe single leg.
Well, that's what yeah, I mean, that's what I've ended up doing with a lot of stuff is just to
avoid.
But again, so again, this is actually another important point, the same vein, which is that a lot of
people say to me, I can't do the single limb stuff because, you know, again, it's taking up too much
time.
And I.
But again, if you get to a point where you're quite strong, then actually single limb starts to make
a lot more sense because the alternative it is again, stealing every single plate in the gym and
aggravating people.
And you know, kind of having setups that aren't, you know, 100% safe in circumstances and actually
having single and stuff then becomes the least worst option.
So this is all about trying to exercise a little bit of intelligence and going, you know, what is
the best path through this scenario.
And yeah, I mean, like in some situations where the gyms sort of the machine stack goes up quite a
long way and I'm feeling comfortable.
I can literally just sit down, do a bilateral exercise and it's 4 to 6 reps and fantastic.
Great.
That is absolutely not going to apply to most people all the time, and it's not even going to apply
to me all the time.
Yeah, yeah.
So we've got to have these options.
Yeah.
So my, my hierarchy there is what you said the bilateral exercise for lower repetitions.
Perfect.
And then I say, if that's not an option, add repetitions as long as you're getting to what the Rep
and reserve target is.
So if you're going to 0 Rep and reserve or one Rep and reserve or whatever, I just want you to add
repetitions until you get there.
If I've told you to do a set of five, it's not feasible do a set of eight, do a set of 10.
And then I tell my clients once I'm maybe a little bit more liberal here, but if they're, if we're
doing single sets, I say, if you're doing a single set and you get to 15 repetitions, we're not
getting that.
Exercise.
That's a hard cap.
And I say we're now doing that as a unilateral, Yeah.
And then if the unilateral still takes you up to 15, we're now changing the exercise.
Yeah, if we're doing multi sets, my cap is 11:50.
Yeah, Yeah.
No, that's, that's pretty solid, I think.
Yeah.
But again, it's, I mean like a lot is going to come down to kind of what equipment is available.
I mean like I even even within the same gym, I mean like there's a gym that I go to near where I'm
staying at the moment and there's two separate rooms and one of the rooms, generally speaking, the
kind of gym stack of each the machine, the stacker weights on each machine tends to come out quite
low.
And I, I would have to kind of use pretty much the entire stack bilaterally.
And I can kind of make it work unilaterally.
But if I go next door, then suddenly I've got a lot more scope and the machines are really, really
heavy duty.
I can stack kind of 20K plates on and I can really get it to a point where I can, I could probably
do 1 Max testing if I wanted to.
I mean, that would be very easy for me in that scenario.
So, but again, that's going to vary across different gyms in different parts of the world and
everyone's going to have a different set of challenges.
So we can't kind of give these sort of hard and fast rules about this machine you need to do this
and this machine you need to do that because everybody's going to have different scenarios in the
circumstances that they're in.
And that's why I think this kind of hierarchy that you presented is really important that, you know,
people have a, an algorithm that they can work through.
So are there any other considerations?
So we're saying single sets high, variety high.
Frequency you could if you felt that so again this is now looking at things from a from the point of
view of troubleshooting.
If you, if we've got a list of exercises, we've, we've already identified 1 troubleshooting kind of
thing, which is you could split the workout in two and you could do kind of up a lower six days a
week.
So you could be doing basically every other day, but for the day off once a week.
And then kind of you're switching between up and lower or between any other muscle groups you want
to do.
I mean, it doesn't have to be up or lower.
You could also leave a Rep in reserve.
So if you were feeling like you were not recovering, then leaving one Rep in reserve is probably
going to be the single.
Actually, it's the only way you can really manage it at that point because we're already down single
sets, we don't want to have a lower training frequency.
So the only place you've got is reps in reserve.
You if you've got, if you've got on certain machines, the option to, and this is going to be a very
small list of machines where this applies to.
And maybe it doesn't apply to any of the machines that you're currently using, but there may be
certain scenarios where you can drop the weight and not have an eccentric phase.
But other than that, really the only thing you can do is leave a Rep reserve.
So that would be the only.
Thing you would not want to do necessarily on ebby muscle.
Not necessarily, no.
You could just pick the ones where you feel like that it's not recovering.
So you know, the classic ones might be chest, biceps, triceps, maybe hamstrings.
Really, the rest of it should be right?
Would you do that with chest so if you're losing that passive tension without being an issue there?
Are we talking about dropping the weight or are we talking about?
Getting into the eccentric.
Talking about dropping, dropping the weight, yeah, I mean, ultimately that is that is going to be a
consideration.
So if you feel like there's a muscle that's developed a decent chunk of psychomergenesis, then
obviously you don't want to drop the weight.
But that is going to apply to, yeah, upper body muscles to a degree, not really the chest probably
the only one.
Lower body muscles, yeah, it will apply to.
So probably can't do that or.
You could do it for.
If you had multiple exercises, you could do it for.
Sure.
I mean, again, looking at the kind of because sarcoma Genesis is really, I mean, this is an
interesting point actually from the new data that's coming out on Nordics and maintenance, it looks
like with maintenance for sarcoma Genesis is a lot lower than it is for hypertrophy.
So it looks like we can get away with training psychomanogenesis either less frequently or with kind
of fewer repetitions.
So, yeah, you could drop it for one of the exercises.
I mean, it's highly unlikely that you're going to have two exercises with the same muscle where it's
possible to drop the weight.
I mean, come on, how many exercises it even can be possible for?
Yeah.
I'm speaking my head.
I'm like, I don't really know anyway.
Very, very small number.
Very, very small number realistically so.
So anyway, but yeah, I mean like that kind of comes back to let me give what let me give a very,
very, very interesting example.
So last time when we talked about glutes, I mentioned that we would probably have a leg press for
the Sarcamergenesis adaption in the glute.
Now the interesting thing here is that in terms of hypertrophy which is fibre cross-sectional area
increases, what you're getting then is overlap between the leg press and the hip thrust that you're
already programming.
So you program a hip thrust, you add in the leg press to get the Sarcamergenesis, but the leg press
is also duplicating some of the motive improvement and the hypertrophy kind of adaption that you
getting in the, I'm sorry, it's duplicating some of the hypertrophy adoption you're getting in the
hip thrust, but only up to a certain level of recruitment.
So the reality is in the context, I'm going to repeat that in the context of a glute training
program where you're doing a hip thrust and you add in a leg press to get Sargomunogenesis, you
actually don't need that leg press kind of every session.
Yes, if if the goal is to trade.
The psychogenesis.
Yeah, right.
Of the glute, obviously if you're doing it for quads and you're doing it for adductor Magnus
hypertrophy, then this is completely irrelevant.
But if the glute is in that I'm I'm doing this to kind of outline a scenario here, then you are
literally just doing the glute for the doing the leg press for the glute psychogenesis.
You could actually just do that once a week in the context of a training program like this.
You don't actually need to do it every single time, but if you're doing that leg press also for
quad, also for like the magnets, then you do need to do it every single time.
So it's, again, it's like a very, very small detail that you can kind of see happening literally
just because of the way the sarcoma Genesis Physiology works.
Yeah, it's an interesting point.
I actually programmed that with squats and lady sentience.
So often what I'll do is lady sentience each.
Same.
Same idea.
Yeah, you absolutely could do that.
Yes, you could.
Yeah, totally.
I find that would be my default in full body sessions that are getting too long is to take out that
exercise that you're using for stretching, maybe out a hypertrophy and do that on alternate
sessions.
Yep, could do that.
Yep, totally.
So, yeah, so I think there's there's some very, very kind of tiny little bits of finessing.
I mean, that's what we're talking about right now, yeah.
There's some tiny little finessing that we can do.
But honestly, really there's not a lot that you can play with other than that single Rep in reserve
to try and reduce some of the fatigue that you're experiencing.
There's one other thing I do sometimes, and this is arguably a little bit more difficult to, to
program across the board, but when I have someone who some people are going to be more susceptible
to strength loss and a deficit than others.
And that's often going to come down to even just how much weight they've got to lose.
And if you are seeing like a fair bit of, of mass change.
And obviously there's going to be changes in leverages and some people are going to get weaker.
And that doesn't necessarily mean muscle loss, but there's just been changes that occurred and that
can be quite demotivating for some people to be doing the same lifts and getting weaker.
And so sometimes I will look at programming differences in terms of repetitions and maybe we don't
normally use just to get someone out of the head of comparing to the numbers they're used to.
And that can be challenging if they know what their numbers are for, you know, 5 to 12 repetitions.
So in some of those exercises where one is more susceptible to strength loss, let's say, you know,
maybe some barbell exercises, multi joint exercises, whatever, I might give them clusters on those
exercises.
And so even if there is some strength loss and we're using a five year Max, it doesn't really matter
if that five year Max is now a four year Max and you're doing classes with it, it doesn't
particularly matter.
And so they don't notice that strength loss.
Yeah, that's, yeah.
Now that's an interesting, again, finessing point that's kind of helpful to just keep the keep the
motivation in the right place, which you know is super important because you know, we're always
trying to keep recruitment as high as we can.
Is there anything, anything else, any other tidbits for people who are programming when they're
dieting or is it that sort of?
No, I mean, I'm just, I guess I'm, I've been kind of really just impressed with the, the routine
that you, you kind of unearthed or created, I guess from Reggie's guidelines, you know, I mean, it's
just really close to what we'd end up with physiologically.
So just again, emphasising how close physiologically directed programming is to kind of silver era
programming for, for anabolic steroids made it impossible to see what was going on.
You know, and this really, this entire message of this podcast that we do together is just literally
that the message that the mainstream bodybuilding community is has been pushing the last couple of
decades, which is that, you know, we know what we're doing because we're big is is garbage.
It's complete nonsense.
It's like, no, that's absolutely not true.
You don't know what you're doing because you're big.
You know, those guys kind of in the silver era knew what they were doing because they had to know
what they were doing to get big.
You know, mainstream bodybuilding today doesn't need to know what they're doing to get big at all.
And as a result, they're just talking absolute nonsense all the time.
But, you know, randomly, I guess kind of ended up with a physiological model that then when we
started talking together about silver air bodybuilding, it became clear that, you know, there were
actually enormous overlap between what Physiology implies is probably the best way of training and
what those guys were already doing.
So, you know, I think it's just, it's been such a, it's been such an enormous amount of propaganda
that's gone out in the last couple of decades in mainstream bodybuilding, which is that, you know,
oh, no, no, no.
We're the guys who are doing it all the time.
We know what we're talking about.
Well, no, you don't, you know, at all.
Very, very, very, very interesting.
This wouldn't work if we were looking at the silver era and what they were saying didn't make sense
physiologically like that's.
Exactly right.
This isn't right.
Yeah.
This is not just an appeal to the past and us saying Oh well they used to do this like that
therefore it's best.
This is literally us saying they had no other option of getting big.
What they did had to work because there was no anabolics and if our Physiology doesn't match up with
that then the physiological model is probably wrong.
The.
Physiology does.
It's the evidence based.
It doesn't.
Well, exactly.
Well, that's my point is No, that's exactly my point, is that like we had a model, you had a model
looking at this stuff, and you're like, yeah, well, obviously that all makes sense because if your
model didn't match up with that, then the model probably didn't make sense, right?
That's the point we've got.
We've basically got a barbell strategy to figuring out how the world works.
On the one hand, you take a group of people whose practical experience had to work because they had
no other option.
And then at the other end of the spectrum, you take physiological analysis, which is from ground up
from things like size principle, mechanical tension, you know, and fundamental understanding of how
motive, how how a motive recruitment is allocated through the neuron chemical matching principle.
And you take those kind of two like completely different approaches to solving the problem and you
end up in exactly the same place.
That's a pretty big hint from the universe that you are onto something.
Really.
I mean, like if you get the same answer with two completely different.
I actually do this when I, when I talk about sprinting bio mechanics and I explain to people how I
think sprinting bio mechanics works.
I take them through one analysis, which is using one set of kind of data points and I get to an
answer and then I switch and I, I actually teach them in a completely different way.
And we build it up looking at things completely differently and we get to exactly the same answer.
And I think that's an extraordinarily powerful approach because if you can get to the same answer in
multiple different ways, then you can be pretty confident that ultimately you're getting the right
answer.
If all of your analysis come to different answers, then there's something underneath all of that
that you're not understanding.
Yeah, Yeah.
OK.
Well, thank you guys for listening.
I guess we're kind of concluding with the best plan for dieting is kind of the best plan all the
time.
But yeah, but you've got less margin for error, I guess when you're dieting because of things like
motivation and recoverability and whatever else.
So you just need to be more aware.
But you could certainly take one of these plans that would be a good dining plan and just follow
that.
I mean, this is my games backed in Group basically like what we've just talked about today.
That's it.
That's what I'm doing with guys who want to get as big as possible, so it.
Doesn't, which is why I said I I genuinely think that this idea of definition that the silver era
had doesn't line up perfectly with our idea of a kind of a dieting phase or a cutting phase.
I actually think that their idea of definition probably was closer to just bodybuilding.
Maximizing every every massive.
Region possible think it was necessarily the same as what we would see.
So I think that's the problem.
They just didn't really see much of a difference.
That's that's my gut feel on this because as you say, the same programme would be applicable in all
situations.
I think what you've you've suggested there, the Ridge makes a lot of sense as well with some of
those performance strength targets sometimes.
Yeah.
Anyway, thank you guys for joining us for this, this unfolding conversation as we went.
Hopefully it is valuable and interesting to you as well.
If not, well, I've had fun.
So join us next week, and don't forget to put your e-mail on the e-mail list for a launch offer
that'll be coming your way in the next couple of weeks.