Episode: 033 How to write programs that satisfy client expectations AND really work
URL: https://open.spotify.com/episode/7GeqAKegavGm9hyputYkct
Published: 2026-01-04
================================================================================

That's the wrong button.
Happy new year, everyone.
This is our first episode of 2026 and it's, well, almost a week into 2026.
And I feel like New Year's Eve was 10 minutes ago.
So I don't know how that's going.
And I feel like this year's going to go super quickly.
But I hope everyone's had a a wonderful start to 2026.
And thank you for joining us again for another year and another episode.
Chris, how are you doing today this year?
I have flu, so I'm not doing tremendously well, but I shall battle on monthly through the episode.
Were you sick for New Year's?
No, kind of just after, I think New Year's was New Year's Wednesday, I think.
Don't ask me, I have no idea.
I don't know, it felt like this kind of came on on Thursday and Friday.
So it's definitely reached its peak at the moment.
I'm definitely relying heavily on lemon tea and all of the associated kind of remedies that they
stick in that.
I hope you add some honey to it.
I have been talking a lot about honey on my social media.
So let's get you any honey bandwagon.
So we are doing a Part 2 today.
So if you guys didn't listen to last week's episode, then what are you doing?
Get on it.
But we were talking about mistakes that people may be making as they get started in their gym
journey in 2026.
And we wanted to do a second follow up episode specifically for coaches.
So last week we're talking about, hey, if you are getting into the gym, these mistakes will to
avoid.
And this week we want to talk about if you're a coach and you're working with clients, whether
that's with clients in person and we're going to talk about that specifically, or if you're working
with coaches online, then some of this stuff will apply to you as well.
Then how can you present workouts and routines and plans to your clients that are going that is
going to achieve the best results possible, but also provide the client with what it is that maybe
they think it is that they want.
Because there's no surprise that if people look online, then what they think that they're that's
going to be the best results is going to be stuff where they're doing.
Maybe I'll give you an example.
Actually, I was at the gym yesterday and I saw someone who was on the machine and they spent about
maybe 8-10 minutes on this one machine doing one side of an exercise.
They're doing a latter race, one side to failure immediately, doing the other side to failure
immediately going back to the first side and then the other, then the other, then the other, and did
about 15 drop sets.
And that's the type of thing that I think a lot of people see online.
And I think, hey, I need to do that kind of stuff.
I need to not be able to walk after my session.
I need to not be able to sit down tomorrow.
I need to have a new novel exercise that no ones ever seen every single session to get the results
that I want.
So how do we as coaches provide clients with what it is that they think they want that is actually
going to work and not just have them doing some kind of circus trick and not really getting
anywhere?
And so we're gonna talk a lot about, I guess, practical examples, stuff that I do with my clients,
stuff that Chris used to do with his clients, and, you know, ways that we try to hack client
expectations to get the results that we want them to get.
Now, before we do all of that, I want to talk about a plan that I guess was a response to a similar
issue that we're going to be talking about.
And this was in response to people who didn't have enough time.
So if you have people who only have 2530 minutes a day, you know, a few times a week, I guess to
work out, well, what can you do with those clients?
You know, a lot of people don't have 4560 minutes to spend in the gym and that does not mean that
they can't get good results.
So these are not new questions.
These are not new issues.
You know, people that the things that people are only facing today, these are issues that people
have been facing since lifting existed.
And what we're going to look at today is how did Bob Hoffman try to solve this issue?
So Hoffman, I'm sure you guys who've listened to our podcast before will recognize the name.
So Bob Hoffman was obviously behind York Barbell, which was incredibly influential.
And interestingly enough, as we've been talking a little bit about some, I guess, post steroid era
plans in golden era, Well, York was where anabolics were first sort of experimented with and
actually utilized in American bodybuilding.
Now, that was obviously a little bit later on.
We're talking the sort of mid to late 50s and then early 60s, but York was at the forefront, I guess
of experimentation with anabolics.
Now Hoffman was, I've mentioned so far like this sort of clients expect this novel exciting thing
and that I guess largely comes down to marketing and there's no shock.
I guess you hear that Hoffman was a bit of a marketer himself.
So he did published a magazine, The Strength and Health.
I think it was cool.
I forget now strength and health.
I think O he was influential, I guess in shaping the narrative around bodybuilding and kind of
competing a lot with with Wyatt Weeder's magazine.
And that was, I guess, also very marketing based now where they had a lot of conflict.
And this comes out even in the plan we're going to talk about today is Hoffman was very biased
towards weightlifting.
So obviously he worked with the American weightlifting team.
He actually like helped fund some of that work and, you know, worked very closely with people like
John Grimek and and some significant weight lifters at the time.
And he was largely pushing for bodybuilding to go more down that sort of weightlifting performance
side.
And then Weeda and Co I guess were pushing bodybuilding a little bit more boards there.
I don't want to say performative, but that sort of more almost like pageant side of things rather
than a weightlifting focus.
So what we do see a lot with Hoffman's plans is especially from an excise selection stuff that looks
a little bit more weightlifting in nature.
So we will see that in even in this plan, which is AI guess a condensed plan for people who don't
have a lot of time.
So the plan was 6 exercises.
Now that might actually sound like a fair bit to some people, cuz obviously there's a trend for
people to do fewer exercises and many sets today, but as was obviously very common at this point in
time, they were only doing single sets.
So 6 exercises, one set of each.
It's only 6 sets in the entire workout.
And this was a full body workout and as was fairly standard, it was designed to be done at three
times per week, so single sets.
And we were doing 8 to 12 repetitions for most of these exercises.
He did have breathing squats in there.
Now we have talked a little bit about breathing squats.
We'll probably talk a little bit about them more in a future episode.
But essentially the way this was working in in this context is a set of about 20, sometimes a little
bit higher, but about 20 repetitions.
And typically what one would do is I would pick a heavier load to something like the 11:50
repetition Max.
And they would do 1 repetition at a time and take a a deep breath or a couple of deep breaths
between each repetition until they get that sort of 20 ish repetitions out.
I think Hoffman here actually recommended 15 to 25 repetitions, but generally 20 was the norm.
So aside from that, everything else was done for a set of 8:00 to 12:00.
So we begin with a clean and press again, a bit more of a weightlifting type exercise and for our
single set of of 8 to 12.
Then we do our breathing squat for that set of 15 to 25 repetitions.
Now they did typically do pullovers after that one set of light pullovers.
The idea was to expand the the rib cage.
We've talked about that a few times and he did mention you can do this after you squat if you
wanted.
He wasn't so dogmatic about it.
Then go into a high pool.
They call it a high pool to the chin.
Now we would call that an upright row, but if you look at a lot of these old magazines of books,
they're going to call it high pool.
So barbell upright row, that single set of 8:00 to 12:00 and then a bent over barbell row for that
single set and then dumbbell alternating overhead press.
Now we actually had a plan, I think maybe last week or at least the last few weeks that used this
exercise.
And I made a comment that it was a fairly common exercise, but we hadn't seen it too many times.
Well, here we have it again, alternating overhead dress and then concluded the workout with seated
dumbbell curls.
Now, I'd love to hear what you think because I looking at this, I personally think there's a couple
of things here that I would do almost exactly the same.
And then there's a few things here that I think are done.
I don't want to say pulley, but I think could use a lot of work.
So what do you think when you say this?
So I think that it's fairly clear that he's creating a workout that is designed to be done with a
barbell and a couple of dumbbells.
Yes, in a sequence that makes a lot of sense.
So he starts with a clean impress.
So he's got a barbell on the floor that he cleans and then presses overhead and then he's got a a
breathing squat that he's then doing.
Now he's got to get that bar onto his back.
And I'm assuming he's not got a squat rack, but maybe he does.
I mean, I don't know.
But ultimately it's the same barbell.
And then he goes into a high pull.
Again, he's got a barbell and he's doing a high pull with that barbell because that's, I mean, I
know we tend to use an easy bar for these type of exercises, upright rows or even maybe cables or
something, but they would typically do that with a barbell.
And then he goes into a barbell bent over row.
So again, he's using a barbell.
So really until he gets to the like last two exercises, he's literally using the same barbell.
The whole.
Yeah.
So it makes a lot of sense.
He's kind of, I've got the equipment that he's going to use and he just kind of hangs on to it.
And he can do pretty much everything from a platform.
And again, depending on how, I mean, I don't know how they would move the bar onto the back for the
breathing squat, but you know, there it is.
And.
Then again, if you're thinking, you know, this is in a, in a magazine for the general public, it's
for, he called it for the working man.
You know, these are probably not people who are squatting very heavy loads for 20 repetitions.
You know, it's probably not going to be an unrealistic low to kind of what what was, was it the
Steinbog squad, the way that they used to sort of hinge it up?
It's probably not going to be excessively heavy to do that with.
Yeah.
So I'm just kind of trying to imagine the context in which this workout is being done.
So it very much feels like he's solving a problem regarding, you know, the time constraints, the
equipment constraints, the space constraints, and he's just trying to help people be able to get in,
grab one piece of kit and do everything and then get out again.
And so it fits the kind of a model of what he's setting out to do, which is provide a 30 minute
workout that's doing as much as he possibly can in, you know, at least amount of time, obviously in
terms of Rep ranges.
I mean, we've talked before about how using sort of moderate heavy or moderate loads, 8 to 12 is
pretty much exactly a moderate.
I mean, moderately heavy would kind of be a bit heavier than that and you know, light and the
moderately lighter than that.
So moderate, it is literally a moderate load.
That's it doesn't require a ton of warm up to do that.
So really nice sort of quick of barrelling through the worker.
In terms of exercise selection, I mean, obviously we've got that Olympic weightlifting bias there.
I'm not a fan of using things like cleans and high pulls in the traditional sense for bodybuilding
because the bar is generally moving too quickly, you know.
So in terms of Chris, can I?
Ask you that you mentioned the high pull in the bar moving quickly.
Yeah.
So when I see the words high pull, that for me is basically from the ground.
So my understanding of how this was done would be having the weight at waist height and then hang
just.
A hang hang high pool then yes I.
Believe so.
Right, OK, now those.
Exercises typically involve quite a lot of momentum still.
The the classic Olympic weightlifting high pool basically is literally a clean but without the
catch.
So you.
Start with the bar on the floor and you just put it all the way up and then you just take it all the
way down.
It's actually a really nice power movement.
If we kind of want to program power movements, I'm not a fan of them.
But if somebody does want to program power movements for athletic purposes, high pool, classic
Olympic weightlifting, high pool is brilliant because it actually takes all the technical aspects,
most of the technical aspects, out of the clean by not needing a catch.
So both people are like, Oh yeah, we've got to do power cleans.
I'm like, honestly, high pool is going to get you a lot more benefit with less kind of, you know,
faffing around trying to catch an elbow, you know, getting in the way and shoulder mobility and all
that kind of nonsense.
But yeah, so, but if this is genuinely an upright row, then essentially, you know, classically it
probably doesn't have sorry, classically it would have.
But in the context of this, maybe it doesn't have that that speed element.
So yeah, well, when I.
When I see these exercises in magazines and stuff back then, typically the way I saw them being done
would be with quite heavy loads compared to an upright OK from the hang position, but using even
like it still does.
Have some momentum.
OK.
So it's kind of like a hybrid between the classic Olympic weight lifting high pool, yes?
And often actually coming out in front of them instead of directly up, yeah.
Yeah.
OK.
So it's it's kind of suffering the same issue that I'm I'm raising anyway, just less so, yeah.
Yeah.
So there's to be some hypertrophy benefit to it, but it'll be a little bit more limited.
Yeah, definitely.
So not as bad as a classic hypo, but definitely not as good as an upright row in the bodybuilding
sense.
So in terms of exercise selection, yeah, I'm not a fan of the clean.
I'm not a fan of hypo or hang hypo.
Hang hypo, just for the reasons that they're not really hypertrophy exercises in terms of the way
that the rest of the excises fit, Obviously, we've got 2 presses.
We've got a barbell press and a dumbbell press, both overhead.
Now there might be a little bit of difference there in terms of the laner in the motion.
There might be a little bit more frontal with a barbell, a little bit more sagittal with the
dumbbell because we talked before about maybe sometimes the overhead press with dumbbell is a little
bit more sagittal plane.
Maybe that's the case here, in which case that would be pretty good.
It would be a nice bit of, you know, kind of crossover.
But then again, we've got the high pull, if it is functioning as a hypertrophy exercise is another
lateral delt exercise really.
So you kind of got quite a lot of delt in the sense you've got the clean and press doing probably
maybe scapular plane, maybe frontal plane in the sense that it's giving you both anterior and middle
or maybe more anterior, maybe more middle, I don't know.
I mean it's until I see somebody doing it, it's hard to know which is.
And then again, alternating overhead press probably more so anterior, but then again operate more
middle.
So it's a very dealt focused kind of program in that sense.
Obviously we know what the squat does, that's pretty straightforward.
But bent over row I'm not a fan of because it tends to be too kind of transverse plane.
So you don't get a lot of lat involved and it's quite unstable and moves you around a lot.
And then of course, curls do what they do.
So yeah, it's not horrible, but there's so much you could actually do better.
So what I'm interested in then and and you sort of bypass the fact that he was doing single sets and
obviously from a time efficiency standpoint, single sets would be phenomenal.
And you obviously made that point the 8:00 to 12:00, you know, reducing perhaps need for as many
warm up sets.
So this is I think this is a very efficient plan.
But if we look at the exercise selection there, if someone's goal were to say he was speaking to
people who just had access to a barbell and maybe a set of dumbbells, how would you adjust this
excise order or selection to better meet that need of full body development with that limited
equipment?
So I think things change quite a lot if you've got a bench and if you've got a pull up bar.
I mean those two pieces of equipment change things a lot.
I mean, pull up bar really is one of the things that that really does transform our ability.
If you haven't got a pull up bar, then a bench to be able to do dumbbell rows is really, really
cool.
So if there's a bench and you can do a dumbbell row, or if there's a pull up bar and you can do a
pull up, then you straight away you've got the ability to do sagittal plane at least pulling, which
gets you a lot better result than doing the transverse plane pulling that you get with the barbell
row.
I mean, you can argue whether it's possible to do kind of more so to plane pulling with a barbell.
I'm not convinced, but you know, you can kind of argue that point, but ultimately it's still much
more unstable than using a dumbbells or or using a pull up bar.
So I think that will be the first thing that I would ask is like do we have that option to do those?
If we don't have the option to do either of those, then things are definitely much more difficult
and maybe you even have to stick with the barbell row, I don't know.
I mean, obviously it's got the dumbbells there like in my, I've got a group which is I call busy to
the future and it is essentially this idea of how you've only got half an hour, 40 minutes and maybe
twice a week out what I do.
And for me looking at this, it's not too dissimilar to some of the stuff I do.
But I would certainly between that bent over Barber grow into a bent over 1 dumbbell grow.
And even if you don't have an adjustable bench or anything like that, you all you need is something
where you can stabilize yourself and then you're good to go.
Exactly, So that's what I'm saying.
It's like how limited is this equipment?
Is it literally?
I mean, what are we talking about?
You know, truly Zen level of of of bare room here.
Literally just got a platform and a barbell and two level.
Or are we actually saying, yeah, maybe there's a box or there's a bench or there's a seat or there's
something you can actually use to create support and then you can do a single arm dumbbell row.
And then, OK, that's suddenly a lot better situation for the lat development.
But honestly, the single thing that I would be doing here to make this transform this work out into
something much, much better is to use deadlift variations.
So I actually.
Thought you were going to say get rid of one of the the shoulder exercises and turn it into maybe a
chest exercise.
So I'm actually.
I'm actually pretty chill about that.
I think, you know, obviously we're looking at this in the context of a time when chest development
wasn't so, you know, exciting for them.
They were much more interested in the the shoulder development.
And honestly from my personal perspective, I prefer the aesthetic as well.
But I think the deadlift variation is the thing that would really make it work because you could do
a stiff leg deadlift and it's really exactly.
You're not going to need that much load anyway.
No, Like it's going to match what you're using with the squat, Yeah.
So you could absolutely stiff leg, you know, instead of doing that to clean and press at the
beginning, you could do a stiff leg and you know, you could just do the the dumbbell overhead
presses instead.
So you could actually use the lose the clean and press entirely and replace it with a deadlift
variation, you know, and that would give you some back stimulus as well.
It's, you know, a kind of from a working man's perspective with limited equipment, it's a really
nice thing to just get you a long way quite quickly.
And then if you do want more chess, you can lose a high pull to chin and you can either turn that
into even a floor press if you don't have a bench or you've got the dumbbells there, you can do
dumbbell flies.
Yes, Yeah, yeah.
I mean, obviously if we're losing too much pressing, then we'll try.
So we're going to suffer a little bit, yeah.
Yeah, because that would be such an easy adjustment to make.
So look, that's not a lot there.
We're suggesting ultimately like what, 2 changes to a couple of exercises and the sets and the reps
we're happy enough with.
That's that's pretty solid.
So the issue that Bob Hoffman was facing here was ultimately an issue around time and accessibility
to equipment.
Now, the issues people are gonna face today probably not as much gonna be accessibility to
equipment.
Time might still be an issue, especially for coaches who are working with clients in APT setting.
They maybe only have half an hour, maybe 45 minutes.
But an issue that they're gonna be facing or people will be facing today that Hoffman wasn't facing
back then is going to be expectation over what a session looks like.
So let's maybe transition down that path.
Where?
Where should we even start?
So when I was analysing this as an idea, I thought there were two main categories of problem that
most coaches are going to face with their clients, you know, at any time of year, but especially now
when there's a lot of new clients coming in who are, you know, kind of interested in working with a
personal trainer or a coach for the first time.
And maybe their experience or their expectations are based on what they see on social media, which,
of course, as we all know, is largely nonsense, unfortunately.
I mean, that's just the way it is.
So I think the two things are novelty and time.
So we've just spent a little bit of time discussing how time constraints were being addressed in the
1980s by, you know, Hoffman's routines and other routines, I imagine as well.
We're looking at small numbers of exercises, one set per exercise, and, you know, some clever
arrangements of equipment so that you could literally use the same piece of equipment pretty much
the whole way through.
So you can already see people addressing that concern back then.
And we will talk about a few things that, you know, you could do in a in a conventional gym these
days to address the same kind of problem.
But I think the novelty one is the bit that social media has probably done.
You know, the job on which is where a lot of people are going to come to a personal trainer and
expect there's some incredibly complicated periodized routine with changing exercises every single
session and all kinds of bells and whistles and fiddly bits going on to make it look like it's, you
know, justifying the price of admission is.
Whereas we know that a really solid, well designed intelligent program actually doesn't change very
much from session to session or maybe rotates between A&B sessions and ultimately needs that
consistency in order to get, you know, high levels of coordination to the point where you can get
high levels of recruitment.
And you can start to see progressive overload happening over a long period of time to become, you
know, to be sure that the program is actually working.
So we're actually facing a very interesting problem here.
Whereas we've got two things to worry about, not just one.
We're not just worrying about time.
We're actually worrying about the presentation of novelty and time.
And the problem with the novelty aspect is that it literally totally orthogonal or actually not
orthogonal.
It's actually 180° to what we're trying to do.
We're actually trying to avoid novelty at the same time as pretending to have novelty if we want to
sell, you know, kind of to the expectations of the client.
I mean, some people will go, well, no, no, no, no, no, you should spend time educating the client to
the point where they understand that what they've been expecting is wrong and that they should
expect something else.
And I'm like, my friend, they will just go and buy from somebody else if you try and do that.
So that's just how people work.
Yeah, yeah, I I think there's a couple of things to, to note there.
So this is an issue that I've made comment about this in the past that I faced for a long time when
I started doing more like for example, let's say a, a, a programming.
So full body repeating workouts.
And it's a conversation has shifted a little bit now where people are now happy.
Some people are happy to, you know, repeat workouts or do the same exercises multiple times a week.
But I would say that's a relatively new phenomenon in in sort of this more recent history.
And for a long time, clients are not happy to do that.
I'm in a lucky position now where people are coming to me.
I've seen me talking about that for long enough that now if I don't give them repeating exercises,
they'll actually have the opposite issue and be like, why am I doing this exercise once a week, even
if there might actually be a rationale behind it.
But to your points, if we're not giving clients what they think that they should be getting.
If you're it depends on who you are.
If you're a coach working in a gym and a client walks in who doesn't know who you are and they just
need a PT, then good luck actually educating them in your first session to get the opposite of what
they think that they want.
Exactly.
To give a quick example here, momentum builds momentum.
Like if we can get people seeing results early on, then that's going to be so motivating for them.
And if we give people something that is unmotivating, like they're going to hit a wall really
quickly.
And so I would, this is not a training thing, but when I was training people in person, one thing
that I would often do with people, especially if they were asked, asking me like they're saying,
Hey, I want to go keto, I want to do this, whatever with a diet, I would use that to my advantage.
And they're like, great, OK, you've got a lot of body weight to lose.
Let's go very low carb.
I know you're losing glycogen.
I know you're going to be 2 kilos lighter next week.
They don't know why they're 2 kilos lighter, but they come back to me next week and they're like, Oh
my God, I've never lost weight in my life.
I've lost 2 kilos.
Let's like, let's effing go.
We're going to do whatever you say now.
So I think part of this is psychology of how do you get buy in from that client to believe that this
time is going to be different, different to all the other times they didn't get any results and how
do we keep them motivated while we're getting those results?
So novelty, yeah, there's different hacks here.
Yeah.
So.
I mean, ultimately, as you were just saying, you know, most of the time we're going to be suggesting
that a really solid program would actually be repeating the same workout pretty much every single
time.
But as we've said before, an AB split is totally doable.
It doesn't, you know, suffer horribly from the atrophy problem and you can kind of make an AB split
work.
You're just going to see slightly slower growth in some of the Moss fibers that you're not training
every single time.
So ultimately, if we think that novelty is going to be a requirement or a, you know, high priority
on our clients list of expectations, then I would always start with an AB split instead of an A, A
or a a A, you know, three times a week Now, I'd always go with the A/B, A/B, A/B because at least
that is introducing completely different workouts sequentially.
So they're never coming back in the gym and doing exactly the same thing as they did the previous
session.
They're always doing something different.
Now, of course, that quickly becomes apparent and you kind of lose the novelty value relatively
quickly on that, but at least it isn't kind of pushing it into the forefront of, you know, the
client's, you know, perceptions every single time they go in the gym.
Oh, I did this last time.
I did this last time I did this last time because they didn't, they actually did something
different.
So I think AB is a lifesaver to start with in this situation.
So much more in line with expectations and isn't actually horrible when it comes as long as the
exercises are selected carefully.
It's not actually horrible.
You know, from a, from a, a long term hypertroid point of view, yeah, you're.
Not losing a lot exactly.
And what I would also suggest if one does go down that path is a lot of people are seeing their
coach or their PT once a week.
If they're seeing you once a week, there is a little bit of hesitancy for clients to see coach to
take them through the same workout that they did last time.
And so AB allows you to actually, you know, let's do a different workout this week than we did last
week together.
And then like you said, this is going to buy you a little bit more longevity, a little bit more time
before you need to make some of these adjustments.
And I think carrying on directly from that, and this is something that I know that you've been
championing for a while, is that you can kind of physiologically get the same output from a workout
by simply changing the implement that you're using for the exercise.
O, you can switch between a machine and a freeway version.
You can switch between dumbbells and barbells or easy bars or whatever, or cables, and broadly
speaking, as long as your resistance profile is the same, your movement pattern is the same, then
you're going to get more or less the same kind of output.
Now, yes, at the highest level, we can argue about differences in recruitment and differences in
stability and all that kind of thing, and that absolutely is true.
And that is where we spend most of our time arguing really about the bodybuilding space, where it's
like, well, am I getting absolutely every single fiber that I can?
Fine, that's a bodybuilding question.
We're talking about client work, you know, where that isn't such a big deal.
But yeah, we can.
Literally, you could have a scenario where you've got an AB split, but you can have a, you know,
kind of 1 and A2 where the A1 and A2 are essentially identical, but they use different pieces of
equipment.
So from the client's perspective, if they're not biomechanically minded and they're not going, Oh
well, this is the same movement, but they're actually going to go, oh wow, this is 4 separate
workouts that I'm doing that are all totally different.
There's actually only two separate workouts.
You've just varied the pieces of equipment that you've done in those scenarios.
Yeah, yeah.
And the way that I would do that is I would just do, I would literally write out an A, a, a full
body.
And then I would just change the after artists and the equipment they're using and turn what is in
fact an A, a, A into an AVC and literally just take every single one of those exercises you're doing
and think to yourself, what is the most similar exercise I can do?
And most clients will I, I had very few times where I clients come to me and say that they were
feeling sick of doing the same thing.
Like that was almost always enough novelty for those clients to think that they're doing something
completely different when it is almost exactly the same thing.
Like even to the point if you're doing 1, I used to do, I used to do pull ups with people.
I would get them to still do pull ups in a sagittal plane and one would be neutral grip pull up in
sagittal plane, 1, be supinated in sagittal plane.
And that would be enough for people to think I'm doing something different.
Here, yeah.
So I think that's, that's definitely a really big kind of advantage if you have that sort of set of
exercises already written out in your kind of templates where it's like these are completely
interchangeable and you're like as far as I'm concerned.
So for this population, those two exercises are completely interchangeable.
And I think that's that's, that's definitely a really big advantage.
As I say, you can combine that with AB if you want to.
I mean, you could take a sort of, you could spend that over 2 weeks really.
Yeah, you.
Could you get a?
Really.
Really kind of what looks like on paper to be very, very varying.
But actually from a physiological point of view, OK, yes, we can argue about stimulated differences
and small differences in resistance profile or tiny differences in movement pan, but they're
probably not relevant at level of the client that we're talking about here because you're not seeing
it likely that a competitive bodybuilder is going to complain about and not having a variety.
So it's like it's just not that population.
Yeah, at the level.
Of the type of client we're working with, these are not going to be the most important things.
Another change that I would also make with clients is, oh, with workouts is unilateral versus
bilateral.
So I might in fact do the exact same exercise and one time per week we'll do it unilaterally, the
other time we'll do it bilaterally and then maybe we'll do a different exercise on that third
workout.
And so that falls.
Under the same category, isn't it really?
I mean, again, we're arguing about small differences in stability, small differences in recruitment
because of total muscle mass, and again, would be relevant to the bodybuilding level.
Probably isn't that worth worrying about at this level.
And sometimes what you can do is because these are ultimately compromises, right?
What we're saying is we're, we're starting with what we think is best and then when meeting as close
to what we think is best, which is kind of in the middle of what the client's wanting.
And sometimes what we can do is package up that compromise.
And I love doing this is looking at that compromise and thinking how can we actually make this work
to our advantage.
And so in that example that I gave of the unilateral stuff, what we could do is say, hey, these are
all full body sessions, but full body A, this is arms focus.
And so we're going to start with the unilateral exercises for your arms, full body B, this is going
to be whatever quad focus.
And we're going to start with unilateral exercise for your quads.
And so we can actually make it feel like the focus has changed or that, you know, there there's some
extra factor there that feels extra motivating and the.
Interesting thing there is that by doing that you're actually getting a pretty big adaption in
recruitment.
Yes, yeah, exactly.
So we're actually getting benefit from this if you.
Start to work out with unilateral exercises for, you know, a particular muscle group.
Then you are really going to be pushing the recruitment stimulus to gain access to new motor units
for those muscles.
So that I mean that's actually a kind of and again, super relevant for this population because
that's something that's actually going to spill over in deployment sessions.
I mean, that's that's sort of the the concept of thought pattern.
I would encourage people to use.
Is that OK?
If I do need a compromise, how do I now use this in a way that's actually going to add benefit in
sort of just being a compromise?
Yeah.
No, totally.
I mean, ultimately my kind of original thought process with this is always kind of, you know, how
can I present the appearance of novelty without really having any novelty?
But yeah, you're absolutely right.
If you can push it into directions of saying, well, you know, can I get something extra out of it
while I'm doing that, then that's even better.
So yeah, I mean, I think there's, there's actually a lot there under the heading of exercise
selection where you can kind of make it look like your exercise is changing.
And you know, in some respects it is, but not very much and not meaningfully in the context of the,
you know, kind of level of development that people have who are seeking that particular service at
that particular time now.
Beyond exercise selection, there's more we can do for novelty, isn't there?
Yeah, I.
Think there's a little bit more, but I think ultimately the exercise selection is the one that
probably jumps out most obviously as being, you know, this is different.
It's like we're going to a different part of the gym, we're using a different piece of equipment
where, you know, fundamentally the movement pattern feels different.
And I think it's the most obvious and the most kind of noticeable one.
I think if you jumped over for this and said I'm not going to do this, I think you would have an
uphill struggle convincing people that you were creating novelty just by using something, for
example.
Yeah.
If you start doing all the other things we're going to mention, it probably won't feel enough.
So if you.
Just said I'm not going to change anything, I'm just going to change Rep ranges.
I think you would still start to hit an uphill battle with your client because they would still be
like, well, I'm just, I'm just doing more reps with this.
It doesn't feel like I'm doing anything particularly different.
And honestly, I'm not a huge fan of varying Rep ranges that much because generally speaking, when we
talk about the time constraints, I'm probably going to have pretty strong views about how many reps
I want to do from a time constraints point of view.
And I'm going to have pretty strong views about how much recovery capacity I've got before the next
workout.
So I'm not going to want to go, you know, super, super heavy.
I'm not going to want to go super, super light.
So I've, I've got a very limited kind of, you know, number of Rep ranges I can work in.
Yes, I can kind of play around in the five to seven, 6 to 8 zone.
Yes, I can play around in the 8 tall zone, but much outside of that I'm not going to be hugely happy
about unless it's in a very specific way.
So one.
Way that I actually do this and we haven't talked about this, I don't think is because you made the
point that if you're not changing the exercise, it may not be enough.
And, and there's a group that I have where I don't change the exercises because I'm just doing twice
a week.
So I do try to keep it a a, but I do want to introduce some novelty.
And So what I actually do in that situation is I make one of those workouts.
We start with the lower body and the lower body exercises, we do lower repetition.
So it might be, say sets of four and we'll do multi sets.
So it might be two to three sets of three to five repetitions.
And then on that workout, all the up body stuff is single sets of moderate reps, So a single set
8:00 to 12:00.
And then the other day, we'll start with the lower body, we'll do multisets, lower artitions and
then do single sets, moderate dress.
Exactly.
So you're structuring it in a particular way.
You've kind of like limited how much exposure you're getting to that more timeconsuming type of of
training.
I mean, alternatively something else that you I know that you do, which is the cluster approach.
And again, you can use heavier loads with cluster approaches and it works really well.
The problem with clusters is that you would definitely want to have an AB structure with that
because you wouldn't want to be doing clusters every single time because you really lose the ability
to do progressive overload track that it's happening.
So again, structure makes a big difference there to make use of that particular loading scheme.
I mean, I'm probably one of the biggest proponents of heavy loads anywhere, but just in the context
of getting them done in a workout where you've got time constraints and novelty constraints, it
starts to get a little bit more difficult.
I think clusters are a great way of doing it.
Yeah, yeah, that's probably the best way I've found of using it, of doing it.
And like I said, you know, a moment ago is, is not thinking you need to do that method for every
single exercise because you you may just not be able to feasibly do that for everything.
Now, actually on that point with clusters, one thing I like doing is sometimes, and this probably
ties into another point, which is not strictly novelty, but it still comes under this perception of
what people think that they want.
And a lot of the time that is people want to feel like they've worked hard.
And so one thing they do, especially those type of, you know, sort of for fire type personalities
who kind of just want to go, go, go, they want to feel like they're in a puddle of sweat at the end
of the workout, is I might use like a cluster method and finish with that.
And you know, we've talked about an Allen Steven method in one of these podcasts in the past where
he effectively did a type of cluster and he would do essentially you're picking your five repetition
Max and then you're, you've got to grab target.
And so he was doing 25 repetitions with that target, with that wait, I normally would get clients to
do 20.
And I'll say, OK, we're going to by picking your five repetition Max of whatever this exercise is
we're doing and you're doing 20 repetitions.
I don't care how you get there.
If you want to do sets of five or 4/2 of 1, I don't care.
But you're going to do, you're going to get 20 repetitions out.
And so there's like a challenge component to it.
This is like, oh, I'm getting to do something difficult if I want to do it.
And we're able to use heavy loads in an effective way that's producing a lot of stimulus that's not
ultimately that time consuming.
Yeah, I think there's a number of ways of tackling that kind of problem.
I mean, I think one of the easiest and simplest ways is to introduce some sort of brief interval
training at the end of a workout if people really want to leave feeling like they're out of breath.
I mean, because obviously, as we know, doing a little bit of cardio at the end of a workout isn't,
you know, problematic from a high purchase stimulus point of view.
So if you've got an elliptical or you've got some other kind of low impact machinery available to
you, then, you know, most of us know how to create a pretty horrible, you know, kind of cardio
sensation very, very quickly on those kind of machines.
Not very long.
Again, you don't need.
Very much time at all.
I mean, just just doing a wind game.
Yeah, exactly.
You can, you can create that sensation in 30 seconds.
So honestly, I'm less, I, I didn't even have it on my list of things, my categories, you know, I
just got novelty and time constraints because for me, honestly, you can very, very easily make.
So I mean, it's the easiest thing in the world is to make someone feel tired.
I mean, that's what we joke about all the time, isn't it?
It's like most coaches are running around out there just making the clients feel tired, which I
mean, honestly, you can do that, you know, without any kind of expertise whatsoever, really.
So, but yeah, no, you're right.
I mean, there is a, is a concern that, you know, if we're not providing that, then some clients may
say, well, I don't feel like I'm, I've worked very hard in your sessions.
I'm like, OK, no problem, we can fix that in 30 seconds.
We can do it, yeah.
Yeah, exactly.
Yeah, yeah.
But.
Yeah, so and you know there are creative.
Ways to do that with weights as well, like beyond the cluster method I mentioned there, you know, it
can be like a again, if you're using higher load further away from failure, you can do in every
minute on the minute for 5 minutes or whatever you want.
You know, there's, there's ways to actually use this in a way that's not subtracting heavily from
the stimulus you're able to get.
Now there's other ways to be providing some of this novelty and clusters is part of this.
So it's changing up sets and repetition schemes is part of that.
And even I guess the structure of the workout as well.
And I've alluded to some of that, but it can be as simple as, you know, I mentioned a moment ago,
starting with lower body exercise and then doing up body and flipping that.
One method I like to use with clients is and it it's relevant to your point that you can't do
everything heavy, right?
Because it's going to take too many warm up sets, it's going to take too much time.
And so there's an old PO, I guess it was polyp.
And I learned from Charles, I don't know if it came from someone before Charles, but he used to use
a method called heavy light method.
And the idea would be that you would superset a heavy exercise, usually a multi joint exercise.
You might do say a set of five overhead press, barbell, whatever.
And then you'll, he would immediately go into a lighter set and it would usually be single joint.
So it might be a lateral raise and you might do a set of 12 or 15.
Now I've modified that heavily, but I do like that idea of, hey, if we do all multi joint stuff and
we're doing lower repetitions, we're just not going to get enough.
We don't have enough time to get it all done.
So I might, in that example, pick a overhead press and we might do that for a set of five and then
we might take full dress period.
And then we're going to pick our single joint exercise.
Electric race would be a good example if the overhead was done in sagittal plane.
Now we'll do electric race, hit the middle delt and we might do a moderate Rep set of say 11:50.
And that's probably not going to require, I would say any warming up, maybe one more upset if you
want.
And so it's a way for us to still get some of the multi joint stuff in, still get some of the heavy
load strength work in, still get like a a lot of excise variety because we're also getting some of
our single set, you know, high repetitions, less warm up set up, etcetera.
So I and I just by pairing it like that, by calling it heavy light, Hey, we're doing a heavy
exercise, We're doing a light exercise.
There's like this mental stimulations going cool.
This is something new.
We're not doing everything sets of 10 today.
We're not doing everything sets of five.
We're actually, you know, alternating.
Yeah.
So this is now kind of crossing the the bridge over from just being about novelty to being about
both novelty and time constraints.
So for me, my 2 categories of things that I'm addressing here are like, am I presenting enough
novelty to my client?
Am I also presenting my client with at least the perception that they're not wasting any time in the
gym?
So I think what you're now doing is you're introducing things that are now starting to bridge both
of those categories.
So when we're doing, say, an exercise, we're looking at our exercise order.
If we do kind of, you know, a string of compound exercises, we're going to have to leave pretty long
rest between those because of the cardiovascular components.
If I then like do my single joints later on, then like I've got short rest between those.
But if you alternate between heavy compounds and and sort of more moderate a single joint stuff,
you're probably just going to do your warm up sets for your heavy compound.
And then I would probably take a short break then and then go in to do the single joint moderate
load without really needing much warm up at all.
Yeah.
Yeah, exactly.
And you can.
Start to really kind of jigsaw your workout together in a way that starts to reduce the total amount
of time that your client is just kind of staring at the wall waiting for you to tell them what to do
next, which is not really a great place for them to be.
And that for me really is the essence of the time constraint more than the time constraint itself.
Because honestly, you know, an hour or 45 minutes is more than enough time to get a really good
workout in.
The issue more for me is, is the client spending time because honestly, if I'm in the gym, I go to
the gym and I spend more time sitting looking at the wall than I do doing exercise.
But that's because I.
Know what I'm doing?
But the.
Client doesn't want to feel like that.
They want to feel like every moment in the gym is something that they're getting benefit out of.
Now.
I think constructing your exercise order or your kind of organization of Rep ranges and, and
exercise combinations is a really nice way to start to make sure that you don't end up with really
long rest periods between, you know, sets or different exercises.
Because you're kind of constantly doing really high demanding cardio exercises like going from
squats and deadlifts and presses and pulls and that kind of thing.
It's like, well, you know, you're going to need 5 minutes between each of those kind of things and
you're going to very quickly chew up a lot of time, but also make these dead zones in the session
when your client doesn't feel like they're getting anything valuable.
Yeah, I mean, both are certainly issues for different people.
You know, some people simply because some PTS have half an hour to do a session and then some have
45 to 60 minutes.
They have ample time to get a good session in, but you've got a client sitting there thinking
they're wasting half of that time doing.
Yeah.
Yeah, totally.
So I think those are the kind of things that we can go after and say, well, what, what can I do
that's useful that is kind of going to add value.
And I mean, I think ultimately you can use potentiation exercises, especially if you're doing single
sets or minimal number of sets for each of your work exercises, then it makes sense to have a
potentiation exercise.
Now the really interesting thing about potentiation is that it's muscle specific.
So ultimately, say for example, the client is doing a chest press and they've done a couple of warm
up sets and they're ready to go.
You can give them a potentiation, potentiation exercise prior to actually doing the main set, which
not only chews up a little bit of time because they've got a single, say for example, they do a
single medicine ball throw into the wall.
That's a potentiation exercise that's going to give them a benefit prior to doing the main set.
That also provides novelty.
So we're actually, again, like I was saying, bridging the gap between the novelty stuff and the time
constraint stuff because not only are they not sitting there doing nothing, they're actually,
they've stood up, they've done the miserable passive, sat down again, waited 30 seconds, and then
they've done the main set.
They've also created them into novelty because I don't have to do the same exact potentiation
exercise next time, Yes.
Yeah, that's a good point.
So you can, especially if.
You're doing an AB workout and then you've you've just got more total variations of this workout
over time.
You can.
Actually include an enormous amount of variety that isn't actually variety.
And this is kind of, you know, really starting to provide what is perceived to be valuable as well
as what is actually valuable.
You know, so I mean, another thing, and this is less kind of immediately beneficial.
I mean, the potentiation effect exists.
It is potential, it is valuable.
But what I would often do when I was working as APT would introduce either a static stretch for an
unrelated muscle group or a mobility exercise.
You know, just simply some kind of drill.
And again, not necessarily related to the client's ultimate goal of achieving a, you know, kind of
body comp goal or whatever it may be.
But it actually does provide that little bit of novelty and essentially it is really just kind of
active recovery or very, very low level active recovery really again, provides a focus of attention
for the client between the main sets that they're actually doing to stop them from drifting into a
spiralling thought process, which is why am I paying to stand here and stare at the TV before I do
the next exercise?
You know?
So it's it is providing some.
Now the thing I thought was really cool when we were talking about this before this podcast was that
you mentioned providing some brief educational sound bites between sets.
And I think the way that you describe this to me is really cool because I think most people who
approach this approach it very in the wrong way.
But the way you described to me was very cool.
So would you kind of describe that again?
Yeah.
So obviously educating clients is beneficial and you know, that's something that can be done within
the context of your sessions in the gym.
What I would do with my clients, my in person clients is I would have, so I would have an iPad, OK.
I didn't want to have my phone on the gym floor.
I don't think that's a good look on the gym floor.
Even to other clients, like your client may know what you're doing, you may be looking at the
workout, tracking the progress, whatever other clients see APT standing there with the phone and
they think that it's messaging between sets.
So I made it an effort to always have an iPad or something that looked a little bit more legitimate.
And as well as having the clients plan, I would have what I would call biofeedback.
And so I'd have a series of usually about 10 questions that I would go through with our client.
And it'll be, you know, stuff as simple as you know, how is your, your nutrition in your diet this
week?
You know, are there any changes we need to make?
Are there any, any hurdles you were hitting?
How's your digestion been this week?
How's your sleep being this week, this week?
And it would be an opportunity to, you know, to take that conversation, which either doesn't happen
at all or it happens at the start of the session for 10 minutes before you get in the gym floor.
And that's kind of wasted time in a sense.
And it would be an opportunity to integrate it into a way that that was just, you know, killing two
birds with one stone, multitasking.
It's client focused conversation.
It's information that's going to aid them towards their goal.
And we're not just talking about what they did on the weekend.
And then they, you know, it's an opportunity for me to gather all the data I need.
And then at the end of the session, I can route it up.
I can send them over any adjustments we need to make.
So I just want to emphasize how important this client focused kind of process is because let me give
an example that most listeners to this podcast will probably resonate with.
You can probably remember being back in school and being taught something that you weren't
interested in, whether it was history, geography, or whatever it may have been.
I mean, I don't know what.
I was obviously not interested in certain things and other people are not interested in other
things.
What?
What?
Was the subject you were not interested in.
I was not really interested in anything at all, apart from maybe chemistry and mathematics.
I think those are the only things that really made me kind of pay attention because they were very,
very complex, structured systems that attracted my brain.
If if a body of knowledge can't be systematized and explained logically, they might lose interest
quite quickly.
So you're laughing out with that because so I'm not making.
Any comments?
So, but anyway, the the point I'm making is that most people can probably remember being in school
and trying to learn something that we're not interested in and largely not getting anywhere with it,
even though they're exposed to enormous amounts of time and effort and energy on those things.
Fast forward to today and you know, we're presenting detailed information about Physiology and
you're probably becoming relatively expert in that field yourself simply because you're interested
in it and it is personally relevant.
And that's the really, really important thing here that you're describing with this approach that
you've taken to client education.
Client education is not going to work if you go into the session and you decide that you're going to
teach your client about, I don't know, motunic recruitment or something silly or whatever it may be.
If the client doesn't have a reason to listen to you, it's just going to go in one ear and out the
other ear, the same way that history and geography and all the other stuff went in one ear and out
the other ear for me, you know?
So now what we can do if we take your approach, it's like you walk through a series of important
areas that you want to question your client about.
They volunteer personal experience of information that is relevant to them.
And you take the opportunity to say, well, OK, so having you said this to me, that then implies that
maybe we need to think about doing XY or Z, which is then an opportunity for them to learn more
about the reasons why you're telling those things, all the approaches that you're going to take and
why they're going to work.
And because they are personally relevant, the information goes in and stays there.
Yeah, yeah, exactly.
It's it's something that they they're now interested in because it directly effects them.
Exactly, I mean, just if if, if my analogy about, you know, learning stuff in school, didn't you
know, really stick Just remember that, you know, kind of the Calvin and Hobbes cartoons are
literally about this entire concept.
The the main character Calvin and Hobbes literally is useless in school and has the ability to
create entire kind of universes in his own imagination to an incredible degree of of detail.
And that that is literally just telling you from like the moment the cartoon was first published to
the final episode.
The entire cartoon is just about showing you that people don't learn things.
If they're not relevant to them, they just switch off.
Yeah.
So a big, I guess probably the biggest part of this time problem that people are facing is coming
now to rest periods.
And so those are a few ways you can either utilize that rest period as we've just talked about from
an educational standpoint, or you can add something in the middle of it as you talked about with
this potentiation exercise you could use or stretching.
There's also ways we can simply reduce the rest period time that's needed as well.
And there's really obvious ways of doing that.
You know, one would be exercise pairings, antagonists, not supersets, because we are taking a rest
between those exercises, but a shorter rest in what we would otherwise need I think.
They started to get caught alternating sets or I'm just alternating.
I don't know.
We, I've definitely tried to clear up that terminology in the past, but at the end of the day,
people use super sets.
I mean, I kind of when I say and I'm tagging the Super set, I generally just mean an alternating
order of exercises.
But again, I mean, how much now are we really going to be pushing multiple set protocols with
clients anyway?
You know, I mean, I guess we're much more likely to be using if we are going to use multiple set
protocols, we're probably going to go in the cluster route, you know, more of most of the rest of
the time we're probably just going to have a different X size in time, aren't we?
Yeah.
Generally, yeah, the only time I'm really doing multi set is if we are using low repetitions like
sub five repetitions.
Yeah, but it that doesn't particularly change how we're going to use.
I guess we use.
Yeah, I see what you're saying.
Well, because it's super setting, whatever you want to call it, even if we are using different
exercises, obviously you want to take a rest between those different exercises.
So it's still I guess relevant in in terms of that.
But either way.
So having some kind of exercise pairing there can certainly help.
And one thing that I do a lot of is when I am using multi joint exercises and not every multi joint
exercise will be like this, but say you're doing a squat.
If I get a client do moderate repetitions on a squat and they're even remotely strung at all that
set of closer failure on on a squat, a high squat, A pendulum squat, anything like that, that is
going to ruin them cardiovascularize for the next 5 minutes.
You know, I did, I did a hip stress yesterday and I didn't have I wasn't able to load it that heavy
right.
Like the the machines quite limited how much weight I could get on it.
So I think I did a set of 15 or 16 repetitions.
I thought I was going to vomit for the next 5 minutes.
So if we give a client high repetition multi joint, you know, squat, whatever, that is a really
inefficient way to utilize those respirators because they're going to need so long.
So what I tend to do with these multi joint exercises is I tend to make them lower repetition and it
might keep your repetition in reserve and you might do a set of 5 instead of 6, whatever, one Rep in
reserve and they're going to need half as long for your respirator compared to doing that set of 10
or 15.
Totally.
And then I think it makes so much sense to just slot a single joint, you know, kind of in between
moderate load exercising is the next thing, you know, and kind of because they're so much less
sensitive to that problem and they've got high, you know, kind of voluntary activation capacity
anyway.
So if you're kind of dropping in something like a, you know, leg press and then you've got a biceps
curl and then you've got, you know, kind of AI don't know, some kind of, you know, hinge or, you
know, stiff leg or whatever it may be.
And then you kind of do some triceps extension or something like that.
You start to kind of go high, low, high, low, high, low with those in terms of cardiovascular
demand.
You know, I think that again is is is not perfect from any many perspective, but it's definitely
limiting that rest period duration.
Those exercises become a true asset.
Even for myself.
I look at something like an abductor or abductor machine exercise and I strategically use that when
I think I'm going to need it.
Like if I've just done squats or something I'm like great, I'm going to use abductor here because I
just want to sit down and do something easy for the next 5 minutes.
Just retreat to the lateral raise machine.
I was like dissing of the.
Classes on lateral raise, I'm a huge fan of that.
That is like that's the trump card for actually reducing some of that cardiovascular demand.
Just collapse.
Into the machine and stay there for 5 minutes.
And then another point on that actually is you can also use those more cardiovascular demanding
exercises at the end.
So I mentioned that point with the like that cluster protocol.
If you've got something like that, say you wanna do breathing squats, you know, this is something I
I don't like that Hoffman did in this workout today is heated and I understand from the the weights
and using that single bar.
Your point was good.
That was probably why he did it.
But if he weren't limited by the load and he could have done that exercise anywhere you wanted, I
wouldn't be starting with a breathing squat.
I would be using that right at the end saying to the client, Hey, we're doing all the cardiovascular
demanding stuff in in this part of the workout.
The easy stuff comes first.
And here's where you can do that sort of bloody 20 breathing squats or you can do your leg crests
instead of 10 or whatever it is.
We'll give you that at the end.
Yeah.
I mean, yeah, breathing's 'cause I mean, it's like the, the, the world is divided.
The fitness world is divided into two groups of people, the people who have actually done them and
know what they feel like, the people who haven't and think it might be a good idea.
You know, it's like once you've done them, you're like, OK, that was an experience that I'm never
going to repeat.
And it just like, it's just not going to happen.
I it's just I think.
Everyone to two years I come back to them for a period of time until I start feeling anxious about
coming back from the gym.
It normally lasts maybe 4 weeks.
I get about.
I'm feeling.
Too anxious did it?
Once and I swore I would never do it again.
Yeah.
So anyway, yeah, there are much better ways of programming.
I think obviously we understand that the limitation was the placement of the barbell on the back and
you had to use a relatively light ish load to make that work.
And therefore that's what they ended up doing.
It is what it is.
We're not constrained by that.
We have squat racks and we have machines.
We don't need to do that anymore.
Anything else to do with time?
Obviously in terms of total session time there's a couple of points I want to make, but in terms of
rest periods or efficiency there any other points you had.
I think to be honest, when it comes to TIME, my focus was much more on making sure the clients don't
feel like they're wasting it.
So it's about constructing a good workout in the constraints of the total time available and then
filling in the gaps or moving the jigsaw around a little bit to limit the rest periods and make sure
that, you know, it just kind of presents the right image.
So I wasn't ever really worried so much about the total session duration because I've never had to
construct workouts that lasted 30 minutes.
I've always had either 45 or an hour, 45 minutes or an hour to, to make a session work.
But for people who are actually trying to get stuff done in 30 minutes, I think it's still doable,
but they probably need to focus much more on the jigsaw aspect of it and much less on the kind of
filling in the gaps aspect.
Yeah.
Yeah, I don't know if this is a cultural thing or what, but I have certainly seen 30 minute sessions
become a lot more popular, at least over here.
And I often will see this in the gym and I'll see PTS working with their clients and their clients
will literally be huffing and puffing as they start the next exercise.
And it's just like, I understand that the PT is limited in the time, but I just can't think it.
Like, I, I what I do is I look at that situation, I think that the ironic thing, yeah, is a client
has come to the PT thinking they're going to get a better workout and they're getting a far inferior
workout, far more inferior than what they would be getting if they went to the gym by themselves
because they wouldn't be constrained by that 30 minute time slot.
And that's ultimately like that's that's so like offensive, then that's the case.
You're paying your professional getting a worse outcome because of their limitation, not yours.
Yes.
So when I look at that situation, it's what I think to myself is what you should be doing in my
opinion is if you're not going to do single sets, at least do a single set protocol with our client
and then they can add additional volume with the one.
So the way I would do that is essentially, I'll do like a circuit.
So I'd say, OK, these are the 8 exercises we're doing today.
The seven exercises we're doing today, we're going to work through each one of those and we're going
to do a single set of each.
And we'll take our two minutes between sets and we'll do our potentiation, we'll do education,
whatever.
And then at the end of that, if you want to add a second, second set, you can do that by yourself,
right?
A lot of clients are self motivated to do that.
So, and what I would do is I'd set them a goal.
I'd say, hey, we just hit 8 repetitions in our first circus.
Your goal now is to match that.
Yeah.
And so there's at least a standard set because, you know, obviously sometimes if you leave a client
to their own devices, they might do 5 repetitions and they're done.
So no, no, your goal is I need you to get exactly the same number of repetitions or whatever goal
you want to set them.
And that way if you want to get more volume, you can.
But that way you've at least gone through everything you're doing in the session with them.
You've, you know, given them any technique feedback they need or you've given them whatever.
That to me is a much more effective way of doing it than trying to smash through multi set
protocols.
Having the client huffing and puffing between each set just doesn't make sense to me now.
That's really valuable.
That's that, that's, that's a really interesting approach.
Yeah.
So I mean, you could literally be going around with them in the first circuit and you could be
noting down on a piece of paper exactly what reps they did.
And at the end of it, you could give them it like a receipt.
There's your your mission, should you choose to accept it, is to do that again.
And I'll go and do another session with a different client.
That's very, very cool.
That is very, very cool, yeah.
And you're still in the gym 4, you know, you'll still work with another client.
So they still, they see you out of the corner of their eye between sets.
You can give them a quick nod or whatever.
Like there's still, I find that there's still that accountability aspect there.
When I did that kind of stuff with my clients, it worked.
And if you are doing short sessions, if you are doing half an hour, that coach knows there's a good
chance and not actually finishing that full workout with our client anyway.
They're normally going to lead them to to do the last, you know, D series exercise or whatever by
themselves anyway.
So if there's already an expectation there.
That the client's going to have to finish something off by themselves.
This would be the more effective thing for them to finish off so much.
Better than just having something novel and different and you know, kind of unstructured and kind of
untargeted in many ways.
Because there's no kind of, you know, you'd put someone on some kind of finisher exercises.
There's no clear kind of how many you're doing and how much effort you're putting in and what, how
does it work.
Whereas what you're describing here is very cool because it's like, I think one of the constraints I
would probably need on that structure would be for it to be mostly machine stuff with minimal kind
of requirements for special technique or form or anything like that.
I mean, you wouldn't want a scenario where, you know, the client has been doing 3 second or five
second lowering phases.
Because as soon as they then try and do that on their own, those 3 seconds are going to become two
seconds or the five seconds will become three seconds or any kind of internal focus is just going to
go out the window.
So it has to be very, very kind of, you know, vanilla in the sense that you're just doing
repetitions self sometimes.
They can't stuff out by themselves, Yeah.
No complicated squat form, no kind of technical overhead pressing, you know, cues or anything like
that.
It's just like this is a machine.
You sit in it, you push this way, you know that's all they have to worry about.
Yeah, you did mention like lowering phases and different focus of intent.
And you know, those are obviously novelty things that can be used as well.
You know, isometrics isn't a good example that we didn't touch on.
You know, we talked about classes obviously, but there are some of those methods that can also be
included just for the sake of novelties, not just for the sake, but we'll also provide that novelty
component.
Yeah, I.
Mean an isometric can function as a post activation potentiation effect and very nicely.
I mean, so that that is again, like I mentioned the medicine ball throw, you could just do a push
into a wall or against an immovable object and it would work.
Now a lot of these things people can do with online clients as well.
Obviously the constraints might look a little bit different.
It might not necessarily be as time based, it might still be, it might be that the client only has
45 minutes.
But the novelty issue is probably going to be the same for online clients.
Yeah, the.
Bit that goes away is that you don't need to present value in the rest periods between sets anymore.
There's no requirement because they don't feel like they're paying for you to stand next to them and
just do nothing.
So that that requirement falls away, which I think is is is good because it's probably the one that
is the most kind of fake.
In many ways, it's the one.
That gives you less additional benefit for for fixing it.
You know, the other ones, you fix the issue and you can usually get some kind of additional benefit,
but that one's kind of like well.
We're reaching, we really are reaching to try and yeah, we're reaching to try and make anything,
anything out of it.
Probably honestly, the educational side is, is the most valuable, you know, And I think that
especially like as you explained, where you actually want to get that information out of the client
anyway.
So a lot of coaches will be trying to get that information as they're walking to the kind of first
set of machines and then they'll end up delaying getting on the first machine.
Then you lose 567 minutes at the beginning of your workout.
What you're doing is you're saying, no, we're going to go straight in, we're going to do the warm
up, bang straight into a first exercise.
And then in the first rest period, then I'm going to start asking you questions.
Yeah, exactly.
I mean.
Obviously, if your client looks like they've been hit by a truck when they walk in the door, then
you might want to question before you start the third.
But that's like, you know, kind of a one in 100 events.
It's like most of the time people can be slightly better, slightly worse, or they're going to have
some issues, but not, you know, kind of issues that require you to change everything.
But yeah, I mean, like, we're being sensitive human beings here.
We're not kind of like ushering people straight to the first machine when they're kind of crawling
in on their hands and knees.
But you know, I've had.
Clients come in in tears before and it's like, OK, we're going to talk.
About what's going on, fix that first before we carry on.
But in normal scenario, 98% of the time, it's going to be like, let's jump straight in.
And then in the first rest period, we'll start going through the questions and answers and kind of
making the educational stuff work.
But I think that's super cool because I think that's probably something I didn't mention last week
when we talked about errors that we see a lot of.
And that is, I think it is an error that a lot of coaches, they burn time because they feel like
they need to do this kind of, you know, sort of checking in process at the beginning.
Yeah.
Yes, but on is there anything else you had on your list?
I think that's everything I had as.
Everything I've got, I've got you've.
You had more than I did, so we've got everything, OK?
Well, as always, thank you so much for listening.
Thank you for joining us for another year.
And I know we said this a few Times Now, but if you do have any suggestions on topics and things you
do want us to cover, then by all means message us.
I haven't told you this.
I've actually started looking at my messages.
I don't know if you'll believe that or not, but and, and look the, the word starting using a lot of
heavy lifting in that sentence.
I can't say I've looked at all of them, but I, I did open up my inbox.
So by all means, message us, Let us know what topic you would like us to cover, What would be
valuable, because we would love to do that.
And like I said, thank you for joining us.
And yes, go if in doubt.
Message me instead.
That's it if.
It if it's important, message me it's.
Important to message me.
OK, we'll hopefully see or hear or you'll hear us next week.