Episode: 053 Progression Models and the Truth About Progressive Overload
URL: https://open.spotify.com/episode/5l70Q36cdnDPqgnRgfKfQB
Published: 2026-05-25
================================================================================

Welcome back.
Thank you guys for joining us for our 53rd episode.
So we've been here for over a year.
We're still here, which surely that means like we've made it in like the top X percent of podcasts.
I'm sure there's some stat there that like, I don't know, 95% of podcasts don't make it through the
first year.
Maybe I'll make that set up now.
So I feel like it's an achievement.
Congratulations, Chris.
You made it through the first year.
I I know you've been doing podcasts before that anyway, in fact, we both have.
So it's not actually that much of an achievement.
Yes.
But anyway, thank you guys for joining us for over a year of episodes.
How are you doing today?
Yeah, I'm doing well.
Thanks, Jake.
Just.
Trying to think if we have any announcements we don't get but we will have some soon so stay tuned.
We will have, yes, very excited about that, but we shall keep quiet about it till next week.
We will, yes.
I shouldn't have said anything.
OK, let's jump into the goods.
So I'm gonna give you guys a workout plan we're gonna talk about.
So last week we did a golden era plan.
I forget whose it was, but it was wild.
Serge, Serge Nuclei.
It was like 4 million sets or something absolutely insane like that.
So I thought, you know what?
We need to swing the pendulum back.
We need to go back to silver era.
We need to look at a maybe a little bit more, I guess, sane type of plan.
And we've got one from George Eiferman today.
Now we have talked about George Eiferman I think once before and he was a fairly important figure in
the silver era.
So, you know, the fact you've made it a whole year and only mentioned his name I think once is, is
pretty impressive.
But Eiferman sort of, he was another one of these characters who bridged the gap between the early
silver era and coming into the golden era, or I, I guess you would call it kind of early golden era.
So he was competing in the, he started competing in the late 40s.
And so he was kind of like a guested generation after people like Steve Reeves and Reg Park.
He still kind of cut his teeth in the, the York barbell kind of scene.
And he's he didn't start winning competitions until I think he won Mr. Mr. Philadelphia or something
like that in maybe 1948 or late 40s.
And then he won the universe in in the early 60s.
So he was very much a kind of like tail end of the silver era.
And he's got an interesting back story.
I mean, you've talked about this kind of idea before where these guys back then, before they stood,
they step foot in a gym, they were more active, like they were just doing more physically with their
bodies than than most people are today.
And they've they'd acquired quite a lot of muscle.
And, and bef it's interesting with Eichmann because we've actually got some of his stats and he was
in the middle.
I think he was in the Navy, some Defence Force.
And in his time in the Defence Force, he didn't lift weights like they, they were using buckets of
water and bags of flour and stuff like that.
And they were doing physical activity, but they weren't actually, you know, in a gym.
And he gained something like 25 lbs in his time in the military.
And so by the time he stood, stood, stepped foot in a gym, he was almost £200.
He was 119195, something along those lines.
So it's interesting if you were to then look at someone like Eiferman back then, the amount he's
going to be able to gain in the gym is going to be significantly less in total than if you've got a,
a beginner today who you know has been sitting on the couch playing games, whatever hasn't really
been active.
And you know, a lot of the time people will ask, well, how much can I gain?
How much muscle as a, as a newbie, as a beginner, how much can I gain in a year?
And you've answered this before.
It depends on what you've been doing.
You know, if you've been sedentary, it's going to be a hell of a lot more than if you're someone
who's out there, you know, hiking and, and playing sports and whatnot.
Anyway, so that was Eiffel man.
He was, he was active before he stood from the gym.
And what we've got here today is a plan that was following in the late 40s.
So this is, you know, a few years into his training, he's he started, you know, working towards some
of these competitions, Mr. Philadelphia.
And in the past episode of his, we covered a plan from the 50s where he talked about what was his
favorite plan That was his his most favorite routine.
And so this is an earlier plan of his.
And if you guys are interested, go back and listen to that episode.
I think it's like maybe episode 38 or something like that and compare how these differ because I
actually think this is a better plan in my opinion.
But you guys don't know what this plan is yet.
So let me enlighten you.
So it was a multi set plan as well.
I'll mention that.
So he he used at least two sets for each exercise except possibly the first exercise.
So the first exercise was hat squat, and he would often do this with three sets of five to 10
repetitions, but sometimes he would swap in the breathing squat.
So we have talked about the breathing squat before.
So breathing squat would be a single set of 20 repetitions, but you've broken it up.
So depending on how you would perform it, it might be that you do 10 repetitions and that 10 reps
will be more or less to like, you know, close to failure.
And then you would sort of do these little rest pause kind of mini sets and get 20 reps in total.
So sometimes you would do that, sometimes you would just do three sets of five to 10 repetitions.
Then you would go from the squat.
And we talked about dread periods last week and it'd be interesting.
It'd be interesting to track how long one would need to rest for after doing a set of breathing
spots.
But anyway, so he then went into a wide grip barbell bench and again was three sets of five to 10
repetitions and then a flat dumbbell chest press.
Now my understanding of the way Eiferman did these was it was a little bit more, I guess, more
neutral grip.
So we've contrasted that wide grip bench to a slightly closer grip with the dumbbell chest press,
and that was for two sets of five to 10.
And then we have bent over barbell row.
I think that was more saturnal plane and that was three sets of five to 10.
And then a behind the neck barbell press.
I think he did these seated, but they were being unseated and standing at this time.
And he did three sets of five to 10 for the behind the neck.
And then we have a single leg squat now live.
This was done for a single set.
OK, So we do have annex size here for a single set.
So single leg squat for one set of five to 10.
So a pistol squat kind of variation.
And then we got car phrases, three sets of 25, which we've talked about in the past and probably
just a limitation on equipment and load that they can use.
And then a barbell curl for three sets of five to 10 and then a triceps pulley push down.
So I guess what we would use for the cable, three sets of five to 10.
So we have 9 exercises in total, almost each exercise two or three sets with the exception of the
single leg squat or maybe the breathing squat and relatively low, I would say repetitions 5 to 10,
you know, similar kind of reps game we see from people like Steve Reeves as well.
What are your thoughts on that one?
So this is interesting.
I mean, obviously everything I say here is kind of going to be sort of, you know, talking about
minutiae really, because in essence it is a very Silver era program.
There are lots and lots of programs that are very much like this.
You know, so ultimately I'm, I'm really splitting hairs with any kind of comments that I make on
this.
There are things about this, but having said that, there are things about this that I, I do like
quite a lot.
And there are also things that I don't like about it quite a lot.
So it is polarizing me a little bit compared to the average or more common Silver era program.
So I do like, I do like the five to 10 Rep range.
I like that because often I mean, I am very much I'm comfortable with, with, with a wider Rep range.
I think, you know, I can see practical reasons why people might want to go up as high as 15
sometimes, you know, but I'm generally much happier if I'm programming 5:00 to 8:00 to 5:00 to 7:00,
that kind of zone.
So when I see 5 to 10, I'm, I'm like, I'm, I'm, I'm pretty, pretty happy with that.
I like that because I think it makes the most sense for post workout recovery processes.
On the other hand, I don't like the volume programming.
Again, it works.
There's nothing wrong with it.
I mean, I've got a quibble around the, the the chest work, but I'm, I'm kind of I'm, I'm, you know,
like I would prefer to see a little work size variation and a little bit less, you know, multi set
protocol.
I think that is not a good use of time and and energy and recovery capacity.
So, you know, I think there's that, that sort of balance trade off if you like.
I would prefer to be on the variety side rather than on the, you know, kind of just raw volume side.
I counted it out and if you if you it's actually obviously if you count the superset, it's it's 10
exercises, not 9.
Yeah, that's right.
With the breathing squat, he would do that superset with the pullover as they generally did, which
usually they would do high grabs, 20 grabs and not normally taken to failure.
It is more like a a light.
So if she was just doing house, 'cause he wouldn't superset with pullover, is that what you're
saying?
Because that's not what you've written.
I believe the way it was written, I believe he was insinuating that this super set would be done
with the breathing squats.
But.
Not with the hack squat.
But perhaps not.
I'll have to go back and double check how it.
Doesn't really matter, but it's just interesting because the pullover would be obviously another
back exercise and it would put the number of sets up in total.
So I counted if, if you count that he was doing a pullover super setting with the hack squat, which
we don't I'm not sure about.
If he was doing that, then you'd have 27 total sets, which is actually quite a lot.
I mean, it's not like a lot, a lot, a lot, but it, you know, it is, you're going to notice, you
know, like I'm much more comfortable kind of in that sort of 12 to 15 total kind of sets per
workout.
I think pushing out double that and I'm I'm squeaking.
I think that's starting to become, you know, definitely a challenge.
And I'm going to think that there's going to be exercise order issues towards the end of the
workout, you know, unless they're being really spaced out with lots of inter workout nutrition and
rest and that kind of so the bits and pieces here that I'm not, you know, super happy about excise
selection.
I mean, again, very classic silver era stuff that we've covered 100 times or 52 times so far on this
podcast.
I don't like doubling up the the chest work.
I really don't like that.
I don't even know that the wide grip is, you know, obviously the starting point, which is going to
get most, you know, all the chest regions.
Even if the dumbbell chest press is more sort of narrow grip.
I'm still not.
I mean, I can see why he's doing that because he's got the behind the neck press, which is more
middle delt and then he's trying to go for some anterior delt work.
But the way he's programming it, I think it would be so much better if he had a steeping climb
version where he was getting very much more definitively, you know, kind of anterior dealt rather
than being very much clavicular PEC pretty much entirely.
So I'm not I'm not really a fan of that combination, especially when he's doing multi set stuff.
Again, with the PEC being so much more susceptible to damage, I really don't think that will be the
one muscle that I would kind of throw a load of volume.
I don't think it makes an enormous amount of sense.
Equally, you know, the the excise selection more generally, I really like, I like the squat, the
bench as in the wide grip bench.
I like the behind the neck press car phrase, you know, curl triceps, push down.
Fantastic.
Obviously people are waiting for me to say that, you know, I'm missing the wide grip pull down or
pull up and I'm missing the stiff leg deadlift or other hamstrings exercise because that's why I
always say, and we are missing those things and it'd be great to see them.
And we don't actually have a shrug in there either, you know, And I think that's definitely
something that I don't want to see.
So you know it, it's a clutch.
You know what, there's a lot of the plans we've looked at don't really have any direct trap work in
this.
Every now and then there will be some, but it a shrug was not that common.
Obviously.
They tended to be, you know, quite a lot of dead lifting.
Sometimes I would do like a deadlift with a shrug at the top.
So I guess I would rely more on those exercises.
But it's almost, you know, what do they leave out more hamstrings or traps?
Probably about the same.
Hamstrings definitely is neglected quite quite severe.
But yeah, I mean as is as is a wide grip kind of pull down or pull up.
So, you know, I mean that is just one of those things that tends to get tends to get ignored.
But you know, fundamentally, you know, done three times a week on non consecutive days.
This is a great program.
Again.
I mean, like a lot of the time when we're going through these programmes and I'm picking them apart
and saying what I don't like about them, you know, I often sometimes just neglect to emphasise that
even with all my criticisms, this is still going to be 100 times better than most of what you're
going to see online today, which is mad, but it's true.
Yeah, a couple of interesting observations, I think.
So you've made the point there that that chess volume is obviously quite high and, you know, he
could have been doing incline, for example, and there were people at York doing incline dumbbell
chess press, you know, Steve Reeves was doing that, for example.
So I don't know why he didn't do that.
But it is interesting nonetheless to observe that almost all these exercises he is doing this three
sets, but the dumbbell chess press, he's he's dropped one of those sets.
He's only doing 2.
And I can only imagine because he's observed that there is, you know, some additional recovery to
man if he did add that third set to that exercise because he is doubling up on on chess work.
So I think it's interesting to see that there's been some thought process there, presumably based on
his his own personal response to that work out.
I don't you know, anyone who writes a program.
It's always nicer if things are even in uniform.
You know, you always want to make everything look the same and then you know there'll be
requirements that force you not to.
So there's obviously been something here that's forced me to drop that set.
I imagine the single leg squat is an interesting choice and it's not something you see much of.
Yeah.
I honestly just, I forgot to mention that I would just take that out.
I mean, I don't see us adding anything at all.
I mean, just as a very, very quick kind of practical comment, if I were doing this routine or
modifying this routine to do, I mean, personally, I would just take everything down to a single set.
And I would just because I'm old.
But you mean you could still do, you know, 2 sets probably or even 3 if you want to do per exercise?
I would, I would, I would take out the dumbbell chest press.
I would take out the single leg squat and I would, I would put in the the stiff leg deadlift.
I'm keeping it in the silver era kind of equipment kind of sort of limitations.
I'm put in a stiff out there, lift, put in a shrug and I'm put in a wide grip pull, pull down or
pull up.
And that would probably make the routine pretty much perfect for me in in the context of this of
this equipment limitation situation, obviously.
Oh, well, you know, you've got leg curls and you know, kind of the extensions and all that kind of
stuff.
Yeah, but I know.
But I'm trying to keep it in the context of the equipment that we've got.
So it's actually not really very much that we'd need to do.
No, no.
And like you said, you know your preference is to do single sets, but you know someone could do 2
sets.
Absolutely.
Do 2 sets for all of that.
You could even push it to three I think.
Yeah.
Yeah, and especially if you look at something like like triceps and he's got the triceps pushed
down, he's got the close grip or the the, you know more several playing chess press.
He's got even, you know, behind the neck.
Like he's he's got a lot of variation in there for triceps, you know, for chess, you know,
technically speaking, yes, he could have adjusted that slightly, but he's still he's still got
exercises here for some of these master groups doubts another one weighs getting, you know, some
regional differences in the exercise selection.
So, you know, certainly could be a lot worse.
I think, you know, given limited equipment, barbell, dumbbell.
I mean, he does have a pulley, but most of this is dumbbell and barbell.
I think it's it's not bad.
Yes, when we see hams, yes, we could do the back work a little bit better.
Yes, it's 1-2 exercises we don't need, but physiologically speaking, it's, you know, Rep range, good
volume, most of that should be recoverable.
I don't like the order of putting like a squat #1 unless you're happy to wait 5 or 10 minutes before
you do that.
And maybe he was happy to do that.
He probably just went over and chatted with his friend for like 15 minutes.
OK.
I mean, if he was doing this in York, I mean, fire, those guys are spending hours is mucking about.
So, yeah, maybe, but yeah, All in all, like I think this is a looks like a fairly fun workout and
it's relatively physiologically sane as opposed to some of the stuff we've seen in in past episodes
and in the golden era.
Now the five to 10 reprint.
So I thought that was interesting and I've this is a change I've made based on what we've talked
about in in silver area plans is most of these guys were not using a very tight Rep range.
Some of the strength based guys were you obviously we talk about people like Hepburn a little bit
and Ridge Park and some of these guys who are using more, you know, double s and triples and fours
and fives.
And you know, sometimes those guys will will work between, you know, one or two repetitions in that
range.
But generally speaking from a hypertrophy perspective, 5 to 10, six to 12, you know, they end up
being the most common kind of ranges for people to work through.
And in modern programming, you know, what I was taught and what I see most people do, we're kind of
taught to use a very narrow range.
You know, normally it's like 6:00 to 8:00 or 8:00 to 10:10 to 12:00.
It's like 2 repetitions.
And not that that's bad.
And obviously we've got access to equipment now that people didn't have access to back then.
But you know, we've talked about, well, what are you getting differently out of a set of 10 and a
set of five?
Well, arguably a tiny, tiny bit more fatigue like not nothing really significant that that's that
different, especially from a stimulus perspective.
So it makes sense to me to use these slightly large ranges, 5 to 10, and then have that flexibility
where if your machine or your equipment doesn't allow you to do such small progressions in load and
you know, if going, if going up and load means that suddenly you can't lift a single repetition with
it.
Well, you've got, you know, this huge range there to actually play with.
So I think this makes, for me personally, I think this makes more sense just as a programming
variable to use today, especially for people who have limited equipment than what we see most people
doing.
Totally.
And I mean like we were chatting about this before podcast and I said I always like to choose the
excise or the the equipment for the exercise based on how the the exercise feels rather than based
on what the loading capacity is.
So, you know, if if one piece of kit has very sort of limited loading kind of increments that they
have fixed and I can't really change them very easily, but that that means there are big jumps, then
I'm going to have to have a wider kind of RIP range when I'm working with that piece kit.
Otherwise every time I go up a notch, I'm going to be completely incapable of sticking in the RIP
range that I want to work in.
But if I, you know, really want to use that piece of kit, then that's just a cost of doing business
if you like.
But I'd always prioritise the exercise because of how it feels, because of what I'm trying to
achieve and the location that I'm trying to work, you know, with the body.
Rather than saying, Oh no, I've got to work in this room and therefore I've got to use this other
piece of kit, which is not quite perfect for what I want to do.
It doesn't feel very good, but it allows me to micro load my wall that isn't.
The way around that I'd want to work and always want to go for the exercise, the biomechanical
reasons rather than the loading parameter reasons.
So I'm in the same place as you.
I think it's always better to have that that Rep range kind of being a little bit more flexible.
Which brings us to what we want to discuss for the second-half of this podcast, which is progression
models and, and how to do that.
What that means.
What is, I mean, we've talked about progressive overload before, but we'll just touch on that a
little bit in context of what a progression model is and what that achieves.
And, and you know, what kind of rate of progression might people be able to expect when they're in
the gym?
And, you know, I've made this comment in the past where while we do see some pretty funky programs,
I think that the most important determinant of whether the program works for someone or not is the
way that it's executed.
And I think that too often people and this, you know, I don't want to blame individuals who are just
following a program too much.
Like, I think that a lot of the time this comes down to instruction from the coach where there's,
there's poor expectation setting and there's poor instruction over how to, you know, whether that
traps in reserve, whether that traps periods, whether that's just an expectation of how strong one
should be getting or can expect to get.
And often I'll get messages from people being like, I've plateaued, I've, you know, I my chest, you
know, this is, this is the message I get like every week.
It'll be my chest can't recover from being trained 3 times a week.
And I'll say, well, have you dropped a single stairs?
Have you tried that?
How do you know?
And they'll be like, Yep, a single set.
I can't recover from a single set.
It's always chess.
It's always or maybe biases, but usually chess.
And then I asked them, well, how are you like, how are you determining that you're not recovering?
What are you, what rate of progression are you looking for?
And like always, it'll be that, well, I, I can't progress weight weekly, you know, I can't, I've
gone two or three sessions and haven't been able to progress.
And I'll always write out like a, a basic, I'll write out sort of like a Hepburn style, you know,
double progression method for those people and be like, hey, just try this, tell me how you go.
And almost always I'll get a message back in a few weeks time.
Oh my God, I'm progressing again.
I had a plateau and it's like, OK, so it wasn't a recovery issue.
It's simply that you didn't know what to expect as far as what progression actually is.
So maybe we start the conversation there.
What is progression?
What is progressive overload?
What, what do these terms actually tell us?
What are these things concepts tell us?
And then we can jump into the practicality of it all.
Yeah, In fact, if you don't mind, I'd like to go back even one step further and and kind of give us
a runway into that because I've got I'm kind of hoping to really capture almost everything possible
in this episode related to progression.
So let me add one bit on the front to that and and we'll kind of hopefully get a flying start into
that concept that you just identified.
So the thing that I want to kind of start with is to give people a little bit of history into why
there's some confusion about what progression means and how we use it is because we have two totally
different histories or cultures or usages in this particular way.
And one of the usages which is very popular in the Olympic weightlifting community in powerlifting
to a certain extent.
And it has been used in the strength training communities for bodybuilding in certain aspects,
basically treats progression as a programming decision.
So basically somebody and they often fits into a block periodization type context.
So somebody will be writing a straight training program and they'll go, I'm going to program these
things or these loading protocols or these search reps, you know, whatever in this week and or these
two weeks or these three weeks.
And then I'm going to change them and do this in the following weeks and then something else and
these other weeks.
So they are proactively changing the loading protocols over time and they are referring to that as
progression.
And the often what you'll see is that either there will be an increase in the amount of volume
that's being done or you'll see an increase in the intensity.
Now that could be intensity in the old fashioned way of talking about it, which is, you know, a
percentage of 1 Rep Max or it could be kind of more commonly used today way of talking about it,
which is the number of reps in reserve doesn't really matter.
And you'll see a progression in that terminology.
So what they're saying is we are perhaps starting out with, you know, four or five reps in reserve,
then moving to to with three reps in reserve, then finishing up with one or two reps in reserve.
So they'll say this is a progression.
And then or alternatively, it could be percentage of one way back.
They can say we're going to start with 75%, move up to 80%, move to 85 and they'll call that
progression.
You know, or it could be volume.
As I say, start out with one set, 2 sets, three sets, four sets.
Again, it doesn't really matter, but the point is that you are increasing some aspect and they are
describing either more workload being done, training close to failure or using heavier loads.
So in all of these aspects, they are proactively programming an increase in either the load or the
volume or, you know, sort of some other, you know, kind of parameter that is related to the strength
training program.
Is this making sense so far?
Yeah, absolutely.
And and you know, most people I guess will have probably seen a program like that, especially in a,
in a powerlifting context, people will be familiar with this where, you know, week 1, like you said,
will be X number of reps at this percentage.
Week 2 will be this.
It usually changes week by week, doesn't it?
It does.
Now, the important thing is that from a physiological perspective, this has got nothing to do with
progress or progression.
Absolutely nothing to do with that, because it is totally physiologically possible.
Unlikely because strength training works.
OK, so strength training works, so you're likely to see adoptions happening, but that's not the
point.
It is physiologically possible to do a program like this and not actually progress.
And actually follow it properly, like actually do the numbers, do the sets, do the reps, everything
that it has actually programmed and not progress, Yeah.
Unlikely, because strength training works, but it is feasible.
And So what we need to understand is that the entire block periodization terminologies are not
physiologically correct because they are assuming that you can proactively make a progression happen
by writing it on a piece of paper and you can't.
All you're doing is you're changing the within work out demands of, you know, kind of how fatiguing
it's going to be and how many stimulating reps you're going to get, at least from a bodybuilding
perspective.
So all that's changing is that you're, as I say, changing very slightly how much recovery you're
going to get and how much recovery you need and you're changing how much of A stimulus you're
actually providing.
What you're not doing is progressing by or you're not guaranteeing progression by doing it.
There is no progression there.
You are artificially creating the illusion of progression by progressing numbers on a piece of paper
that does not translate automatically to progression in the individuals adaptive processors.
And this is super, super important because I get many, many, many messages from people asking about
progression and progressive overload.
And the entire worldview is rooted in what I'm describing now, this bot periodition idea that you
can write on a piece of paper what you want people to do and it's somehow going to make them
progress.
And it doesn't, it doesn't automatically do that.
You're just describing something on paper that has nothing to do with physiological reality.
Now, as I say, strength training works, so, you know, chances are that they will actually progress,
but it has nothing to do with the progression that you are describing on that kind of model.
You could equally program the exact same routine, three sets, you know, or even one set to failure a
few times a week and it would do pretty much the same thing.
I'm saying it would do exactly the same thing, but it could do and it actually could lead to
progression, you know, equally well or not equally well, again, depending on the person.
So that brings me to the other side of the equation.
So what I'm saying is that is a worldview which has been kind of foisted upon us by the
periodisation enthusiasts.
I'm losing patience with daily actually.
I'm getting to the point where I'm actually going to start being quite critical of if I'm not being
very critical already, I'm going to start getting even more critical because I think they're
actually being actively kind of problematic for an understanding of what's going on in, in terms of
the adaptations because the terminology is being used incorrectly.
So the other way of thinking about progression is to say, well, if I'm watching what's happening in
a strength training program and I am seeing that the person who is maintaining or the the the lifter
who is maintaining the same proximity to failure, whether that's two failure or the leaving 1
represer or whatever.
And they are actually increasing the number of reps that they're capable of doing and or they are
now starting to put the weight up.
I am receiving feedback from that training program that progression is happening as in I am
observing, writing down a piece of paper, the numbers that they're achieving over the course of the
training program that they are actually improving.
So on the one hand, we've got this proactive like input based progression idea where I'm like, I'm
telling them to do more and more and more each time and get stronger, as if commanding them to get
stronger is somehow going to make them stronger.
And on the other hand, I'm simply observing that the fact that they are now actually getting
stronger and I'm receiving that information and it's an output of the training program.
So I think really what we've got to understand is that there are two totally different ways of using
the word progression in the strength training communities, which are overlapping.
They do tend to come from different places and get used in different ways, but they are
fundamentally different. 1 is like if I write down on a piece of paper that someone has to do these
things in this order and get stronger than magically, that's somehow going to make them stronger,
which I just don't agree with.
And on the other hand, literally just observing the fact that the person is getting stronger and
writing that down and noticing that it is happening, which is an output of the strength training
that they are doing. 2 totally different perspectives.
One I think is fundamentally flawed, and 1 I actually think is is correct, which is the observation
of what is actually happening.
It's, I'm trying to put my finger on the some subtle differences here and it's difficult because
there's those kind of two polar opposites to an extent, but then there's some overlap in middle
ground as well.
So I'm thinking of something like a method we've told about in the past, like the Hepburn method,
which you could actually feasibly write down ahead of time.
These are the numbers you're going to hit.
So it looks very similar to what you've just explained there, yes.
It does, and that's kind of where you get somebody who's, you know, an absolute genius kind of
strength training both intuitively and, you know, probably in in kind of just the practical skill.
I mean, he was just very, really, really, really good at what he did.
And he was able to figure out a rate of progression that would work for most people most time.
And I speak from, you know, extremely kind of practical experience of this, having run Hepburn model
for 18 months on the squat.
And yeah, I literally didn't do anything else for 18 months.
Just run the whole thing.
And yeah, it, it, it wave loads essentially.
And you're never really the same proximity to failure on anything any really at any point in time.
And there are kind of weeks when it feels a bit easier and weeks and it feels a bit harder.
And it, it's like it's a very, very, very artful piece of work, that training program.
Like that's the exception of the process of rule.
I think that kind of thing where you've got somebody who's, who's able to create something like
that.
And it does work.
I mean, I think it's a strength program.
It's not really a bodybuilding program.
But I think that's kind of the exception of the process of rule where you've got something that that
good, but I don't think most of the other stuff works.
It's almost as if because you look at something like that and what he's done, what Hepburn did, and
we've touched on Hepburn in the past and basically just, you know, adding one repetition to 1 low
Rep set over over, you know, weeks.
And then eventually as you get up to, you know, 3 or 4 repetitions of any how you're doing it, you
drop back down.
And we'll talk about that sort of progressive model more in a moment.
But it feels to me like there's a difference here between slang yard and expectation of here's how
quickly one can expect to get stronger compared to almost overlapping periodization onto a
progression model and kind of explaining it away with your progressing because we're, you know,
hitting these different strength qualities or because we're, you know, advancing volume or because,
and it's, it's, it's pulling it forward.
It's like, it's this idea of like, well, we can, we can cause a progression by doing X as opposed to
you will be progressing probably at this rate.
And this is how you can continue to train given how much you're likely to be progressing.
And it's these are very minute differences, but they, they matter, don't they?
Totally, totally.
And I think really the genius of of Hepburn was that he understood that to create something
reliable, it has to be small and contained.
So it was like 8 sets of two with A5 Rep Max approximately, and you gradually add an extra Rep on
each of your sets until you get to 8 sets of three.
And then you put the weight up a little bit and then you start again.
And that is a small and contained kind of wave loading periodisation model, if you'd like that.
That works.
And you know, he was really, really good at obviously strength training programming to the point
where I was able to create that when somebody's creating something on the fly that they, I mean, he
obviously did that loads of times on his own.
He probably saw a whole bunch of other people do it, you know, and he gained a lot of experience
with that particular progression model.
In contrast, what I see in the kind of wider strength training community today, people are just
throwing together programs and go or just do these.
And like, honestly, you can't do that.
You know, you can't just kind of guess the rate of progress, you know, and, and start pulling
programs together that you think are going to kind of work.
You've got to limit.
If you want to get to the point where you can create something as, as effective as what Hepburn did,
you're going to have to limit yourself to a small.
I mean, I've tried, I've tried to do it and I wasn't actually that happy with what I ended up with.
I've tried to do it with, you know, kind of three sets of five rising to 8 and it kind of works.
It just doesn't work for the same amount of time that the 82 to 3:00 works for, you know, And I
think you've got to kind of limit yourself to a relatively small kind of contained progression
model.
And you've got to make sure it works for you for long periods of time.
And you've got to make sure it works for other people for long periods of time.
And then sure, wheel it out and and like kind of popularise it fantastic.
But that's not what I'm talking about.
What I'm talking about is when people are constructing like on the fly large, sort of full on, you
know, strengthening programs across multiple exercises and the things are changing all over the
place.
And there's percentages flying around and there's reps and reserve flying around and there's all
kinds of things being changed.
And it's like, there is literally no way you're going to be able to predict that's going to work in
the way that you're planning it, in the way that you're writing.
And I think a lot of it comes down to, and it's almost luck because it comes down to what variable
has that person chosen to, to periodize or progress or whatever in their plan.
Because I've seen plans where people are progressing reps in reserve.
And I'll say this week, you're going to do 4 reps in reserve this week, you're going to do 3 this
week, you're going to do 2 this week.
And it's like, what?
How, how?
Literally is no reason to do that at all.
Precisely.
But then you might have someone who they've decided to periodize, and maybe they are periodizing
repetitions and they're saying we're doing the same load, but we're adding one repetition each week.
Or maybe they have like this.
Depending on what variable you decide to try to progress, you might just be lucky and that's
actually going to be beneficial for that person's actual progression.
But if you pick the wrong variable, like perhaps you deserve, you're just wasting half of those
weeks.
So, yeah, I'm just thinking back to some of the periodized programs I've seen.
OK, yeah.
And and the.
Point the point that I'm giving here is not so much that periodisation is bad, I mean it is.
But what what I'm trying to explain is that most of the confusion that we have today in the fitness
industry about what progression means is because the terminology has come through two totally
different pathways and has different, you know, if you like cultural settings and references and
understandings and concepts behind it.
So when people start talking about it, they end up talking across each other.
This is why a lot of the time you've got a whole bunch of creators rightly making the case for
progression being an output as in a, a feedback like information source from the strength training
program, which is what we would think of it as as in, you know, are you getting stronger?
Great.
That's progressive overload happening.
You know, whereas you've got a whole bunch of other people going, no progressive overload.
It means that you have to add more into your program over time.
And I'm like, no, that's coming from the block periodization community.
It's just fundamentally wrong.
It doesn't make any sense.
Yeah, it's, it's interesting to, to wonder when that changed because, you know, for example, I've
seen videos of of Mike Mincer where he'll talk about the, the thing that causes the progress will be
say, you know, that that final repetition because you're doing something you've not done before.
So you need to get an extra Rep you haven't done before.
Otherwise, your body's not going to be forced to adapt.
Yeah, you see, because that's just not true.
That's actually not how hypertrophy.
Works and so we're we're seeing terminology like, you know, narratives like that coming up in the
golden era, but then I don't see much of that in the silver area.
In the silver area, it's you lift, you know, generally they would talk about, you know, not lifting
on the nerve or how they talked about it.
So you're not going to fairly, you're going to the point of congestion, they would say.
So basically it sounds to me like they're talking about one Rep in reserve.
And then you try to add as you know, load as you can, as you realize that you can lift heavier and
it's just more intuitive, like can you lift heavier, lift heavier?
Can you lift heavier again this week?
Lift heavier.
And sometimes, you know, we've talked about Hepburn and and, and Bob Hoffman had a similar kind of
model where, and funnily enough, he called it the double progressive method, which is every second
workout, see if he can add a repetition, right?
Not what we would call a double progression method.
And terminology gets confusing.
But you know, some yeah, sure, sometimes these people would say, oh, this is probably how fast one
can adapt.
But they weren't talking about it in the sense of, well, if you don't add this Rep, you haven't
grown from that workout.
So there's clearly been this shift in understanding, belief, whatever that's happened.
Seventies. 80s.
Yeah.
I mean, like the skeptical amongst us might kind of say, well, you know, at the point where anabolic
steroids came in and made it impossible to tell what was going on, people just started making stuff
up.
I mean, that's kind of how I would skeptic.
Potentially they they work every session and so yeah.
So, but anyway, all I wanted to do was to kind of just add on that little bit of historical kind of
perspective, because I don't think anything about progression, any conversation about progression is
going to make any sense to anybody unless they understand that the the history has given us these
two totally different kind of starting points.
And if you've got somebody who's talking to you and they're talking from this perspective of
popularisation thinking, and you're talking about it from like a well, are you getting stronger?
Well, that's that's what is going to allow you to kind of display perissivode.
If you're thinking about it as an output and they're thinking about it as an input, then neither of
you are going to be able to actually connect in the conversation that you're having.
And that's, I think what is happening the time on social media, you just got one group of people
talking about it from this perspective, the other group of people talking about from a different
perspective, and nobody's actually able to understand what the other group are saying.
Yeah, yeah.
But we would say, well, OK, what is you know, what is progressive overload?
Well, progressive overload, which is a horrible terminology because ultimately, you know, it really
plays into the bot periodization kind of ideas.
It it really just means am I getting stronger?
Am I able to lift, you know, either a slightly heavier weight or do more repetitions with the same
weight as I did last time.
Now, now somebody who's being really picky could say, well, you know, does it also mean that maybe I
can leave, you know, shorter rest periods?
Or does it also mean could I use a slightly larger range of motion?
Or I mean, fine, OK, you can stretch the definition a little bit to include those things if you, you
know, really wanted to.
But generally speaking, in the context practically of most strength training programs, it really
just means can I do more reps, you know, to failure or with the same proximity to failure?
Or can I lift a heavier weight really.
I mean the simplest way to think about it is did I have to get stronger to be able to do this?
Exactly, exactly.
That's the best way of actually having an umbrella term across the whole thing.
So OK with that as our framework, did we get stronger to achieve this thing?
What is Where does that land us?
What it means is that an adaption had to have happened in order for us to be able to achieve those
new numbers.
So one of the strength related adaptations, not actually in this context, not strictly just strength
related adaptations, but if you're working in a Rep range that's above like three, well maybe 5,
then you also potentially got a little bit of muscular endurance.
Now it starts off being really a little bit, I mean like if you look at the kind of adaptations in
terms of muscular endurance that happen across Rep ranges, one to five, you're not really seeing any
kind of improvements in muscular endurance as a result of heavy strength training.
As you get above that and towards 10, yes, you start to see a little bit, but honestly, it's not
very much when you clear 15, yeah, it's pretty meaningful.
So yeah, if you're working in five to 10, you might see a little bit of muscular endurance related
adoptions starting to help you as well.
So it's not pure maximum strength.
There's also a little bit of relative muscular endurance in there as well.
So ultimately, if we kind of just work on the basis of maximum strength, obviously you've got your
coordination improvements, you've got correctivation reductions, which is more or less the same
thing as coordination improvements.
We've got motive improvement increases.
And then on the peripheral side, we've got hypertrophy cycle myogenesis, lateral force transmission
and maybe a little bit of tenant stiffness.
Honestly, if we look at the kind of sort of strength training programs over time, if we're starting
a a new training program and we're doing exercises that we're not familiar with, basically you're
going to see just gigantic improvements in coordination and and the accompanying reductions in Co
activation.
I mean that's just going to happen.
If we're not doing that, if we're doing exercises that we're very familiar with, then we're not
really going to see much of A change on that particular score.
Obviously peripheral side, you know, soccer majority is certainly really going to happen if we're
kind of, you know relatively that's a relatively novel stimulus to us natural force transmission.
We don't really know much about South.
Broadly speaking, tennis difference tends to plateau.
So most of the time we're really kind of seeing hypertrophy as the main driver of, you know, kind of
strength gains in well trained people who are familiar with the exercises.
Now, does that mean you're not getting any of the other stuff if you're well trained?
Well, no, it doesn't.
You're still going to get a little bit to that kind of thing.
But we are going to see that relatively speaking, hypertrophy is going to be a pretty big component
of the strength gains of most people most of the time in routines that they are relatively familiar
with.
Now, interestingly, what most people tend to do when they've been doing a routine for a couple of
months and they start to see that their gains and strength are really grindy, they start to go, oh,
I need to do something different.
I'm like, no, you're just having it revealed to you precisely how fast hypertrophy is contributing
to your strength things, that's what's.
Happening.
That's really important point and that's that's something I always try to to sort of drive home with
clients.
When people come from the background where they've been changing plans every four weeks, doing new
exercises every few weeks and they're expecting to be progressing.
You know, often, you know, adding 5 kilos or 10 kilos a week to a lift because it's a new lift for
them.
And then they get 4-5, six weeks in and they start to see that slow down.
They start to think that that's them plateauing and like, OK, I need a new lift.
I need a new exercise and need a new phase.
And the way I'll explain that to clients is no, actually what's happening now is, is now we're
actually just seeing the hypertrophy.
And yes, it's of like you said, there's going to be some of these other bits and pieces that are
still coming along, but most of it now is actually be going to be due to adding contractile proteins
as opposed to all these neural adaptations, coordination, etcetera you were getting previously.
Which is why, you know, we've talked about this in the past.
If you're, if you're programming new phases, sure they can be, you know, maybe repetitions might
change excise or might change you might do some unilateral stuff, whatever.
But by and large, the core excise selection should really stay consistent across phases unless like,
you know, why do you need to change it out?
OK, there's a better exercise.
You've identified you want to split that, that sort of muscle and then focus on different regions.
Or maybe that exercise is hurting you, but just changing it out because you're now progressing at a
slower rate.
That's really where the magic is happening.
Yeah, absolutely.
I mean, ultimately, you know, that is a really, really critical point that I think practically is
very helpful to take on board that when we start to see an exercise progressing very, very slowly,
because we've been doing it for a number of months, absolutely is the time to, you know, be super
clear about the fact that the rate of gains and strength and that exercise are slow.
Because pretty much all of the strength gains are coming from hypertrophy.
And we've just got to let the rate of progress be what it is.
And that's just such a great kind of encapsulation of what progressive overload really is, which is
this is a feedback to us about the success of adaptations happening in the context of the drink
drink pro.
Now I'm saying adaptations because it is adaptations.
It is all of the adaptations.
And therefore the rate of progress will be faster when there are more adaptations happening, as in
when we're unfamiliar with the excise or we've got, you know, kind of capacity to increase
recruitment or psychomagnetics or whatever it may be.
You are going to see faster rate of progress because you're getting more individual adoptions.
As you get fewer and fewer adoptions, you will see a slower rate to post.
Doesn't mean that hypertrophy is happening at a different rate.
Hypertrophy is probably happening at the same rate all the way through.
It's just that you were getting other adoptions earlier that you're now not getting later on.
So progressive overload is the feedback that you are achieving some adoptions and the larger the
rate of progressive overload, the rate of progress, the more adaptations likely are actually
occurring.
And of course, you know, just because the rate of progress is slow probably just means that we're
just getting hypertrophy towards the end of that, you know, kind of time spent training with that
particular exercise.
So if someone's not progressing, you can't just force that progression.
Yeah, I think that's a key decision to make it because the way people talk about progressive
overload, they're like, well, you're not progressing because you haven't got enough volume.
You're just going to add more volume that'll get you to progress.
Or you're not progressing because you haven't planned the progression in the way you sort of talked
about earlier.
And what you're saying is, well, no, no, no, you're not progressing because the program itself
obviously has missed the mark in terms of the stimulus and the variables in recovery and whatever
else.
And that's what we need to be focusing on, not just saying, well, you know, we we need to just
undulate volume.
We need to undulate intensity or, or whatever.
Yeah.
So this is a really important point.
I mean, this might end up being a separate podcast topic, to be honest.
But I mean, what we can say, you know, to begin with, what we can say is that as I've said before,
stimulus is not really volume dependent.
So what I mean by that is that if I do a single repetition of an exercise and it qualifies as a
stimulating repetition.
So let's say I've got a fibre at Max and I do a single repetition and that that is, you know, has a
high level of motive recruitment and it has a slow movement velocity leading to high level
mechanical tension.
And I don't have any fatigue mechanisms present or very much fatigue present.
So I'm, I'm definitely getting my high level of recruitment, my high level of effort, I'm definitely
getting my high level of tension with my slow movement velocity that has accomplished A stimulus for
hypertrophy.
If I then do another repetition or separate repetitions, you know, 48 hours later and then again 48
hours later and I'm avoiding any opportunity for atrophy to occur and I'm continuing to add the
stimulus, then I will end up adding muscle mass over time.
There is no scenario where doing insufficient volume is going to be an issue there.
I mean, OK, fine.
If you're doing single reps like, you know, kind of every other day, then it might take you 6 months
to notice anything meaningful happening.
But you know, like if you're doing just a single set, you're getting 5 stimulating reps or you're
doing maybe just one Rep preserve whatever.
There is no scenario in which that is failing to achieve hypertrophy as long as my criteria for
hypertrophy are being met.
So if somebody is out there arguing that somehow that routine is failing because not enough volume
is being done and that someone needs to go in and do 2 sets or three sets or four sets instead of a
single set, I just fundamentally disagree with them because qualitatively, you know, the stimuli
criteria are being met and therefore hypertrophy will happen.
Yes, if you do a little bit more volume, you will increase the magnitude of that stimulus and so you
make progress very slightly faster, but you know, it's not linear.
Your second set is going to give you probably 40% of your first set on top of what you're getting,
which is not huge amount more and it's costing you in terms of fatigue.
So it's going to affect the other stuff that you're doing.
So genuinely speaking, I think it's fundamentally not really valid to say, oh, well, you're not,
you're not progressing on one set three times a week.
Therefore you should do 2 sets or three sets.
I'm like, no, if you're not progressing on one set three times a week, then either it's just that
your progress is slow or that you've actually capped out and you need to fundamentally change the
exercise that you're doing by increasing the capacity of moutine recruitment.
So you either need to, you know, kind of move the exercise earlier in the workout, or you need to do
single kind of limb, single joint stuff to try and get access to more moutine recruitment, or you
need to do something that actually increases recruitment as an adaption.
So maybe think about doing some isometrics before you even start the workout, just like as a warm up
protocol to try and push motive equipment to a higher level as an adaption.
But simply just doing more volume is OK.
You're going to move very slightly faster, but it's not qualitatively changing.
I'm just what I want to be really clear about is that yes, you are quantitatively moving slightly
faster, but you're not qualitatively changing.
I think so, you know, if, if you were to say, well, you know, you're not progressing on this on set
three times a week, therefore do three sets and you will progress.
No, that's not valid.
And what you, what you can argue is you're progressing very slowly on one set three times a week.
And I think you could progress faster on two or three sets three times a week.
Totally acceptable argument.
What is not acceptable as an argument is to say one set is not creating a stimulus and three sets
will create a stimulus.
That is fundamentally so physiologically flawed is actually getting me quite worked up to even think
about it.
You know, it is not a valid statement.
It is not a valid statement.
It's not even an argument.
I don't know how people can make that argument.
So I think that's really important because what you said there is if the requirements for
hypertrophy are being met, then like we need to identify that first and foremost, right.
So I made this point a few weeks ago where I said, I think people are are putting too much emphasis
on progressive overload.
Because to your point, if, if we know that the program is meeting those requirements, we don't need
to get that caught up in the progressive overload.
It's there as a litmus test to see is the program actually working or not.
But if the requirements are there, why would the program not be working, right?
So then ultimately what we've got is an issue of expectation.
Yeah.
So if we know the requirements are all met for hypertrophy to be achieved, then what we've got is,
is something expecting to progress quicker than they actually are able to.
And that's what you said there where you said, OK, maybe adding more volume might get something
progressing more quickly than they would be otherwise.
But they are still hypertrifying.
It does not change.
Whether or not they will, unless they're doing a really silly program, okay, fine.
If somebody training like body parts play and doing one workout a week, then yes, at that point the
number of sets per workout does change whether or not they make progress.
Because if they do three sets, then it's going to basically stays stunning still.
If they do 5, then OK, they'll make a little bit of progress.
But fundamentally, if they're training two or three times a week, then the number of cents does not
determine whether or not they make progress.
All it does is slightly change the rate of that progress.
So yeah, I think basically, as you say, what we want to do is say, well look, is the program, you
know, going to work?
Is it actually physiologically plausible?
In which case let it run for a couple of weeks and yeah, look for a strength gain over a longer
period of time.
And if it's there, then yeah, the program is working.
It's just happening slowly.
So chances are not that you're gaining muscle mass really slowly actually, it's that you're just not
getting any other adaptations.
I, I think this is a really important point.
People go, oh, I'm, I'm not making, I'm not gaining any muscle mass because I'm making strength
gains really slowly.
I'm like, probably nothing to do with that.
It's probably you're not getting any other adaptions at all.
So actually your rate to hypertrophy could be the same as it was when you were making super fast
strength games and you were getting really excited.
When you're getting really excited, it was just coordination.
Yeah.
So the reality is your excitement is not a good metric for whether or not your muscle mass rate of
progress is actually, you know, kind of good or bad.
Yeah.
If you to think about how much muscle are you actually growing realistically, are you expecting that
to translate to you know kilos and kilos in a bar every week?
Well, obviously, obviously not if we're talking about grams of of contractile tissue being being
added.
So the way I see it is progressive overload is just confirmation that the program is working and
progressive models are just expectation management.
Does that check out?
Well, I think it so in the context of the Hepburn model that you introduced earlier, yes, I think
that's completely fair to call Hepburn model an expectation management tool.
I think it is more than that.
I think it is a very strong guideline for keeping people within a sort of set and Rep and Rep in
reserve protocols.
The reps in reserve are changing all the time and that's the genius of it.
That's the thing.
When you really sit down and start playing with it, you realise that your reps in reserve are moving
and they're moving in a quite a subtle way constantly where you're kind of ending up brushing up
against failure right at the very end, but you're not really getting there.
And that just seems to hover around about the same kind of place all the time, which is the genius
part.
And that's where it's, it's not only expectation management, it's actually kind of adaption
prediction because it is literally predicting that your adaptations will take you to a certain point
and leave you with represent reserve at that particular point at that point in your kind of progress
in the cycle.
So it is it's both expectation management, it's also adaption prediction, which is the bit that
people think they can do with block periodization models and they can't because they're not at the
level that Outbound was at.
And they're not really kind of limiting themselves to what Hempburn limited himself to.
I mean, Hempburn limited himself to, as I said before, to a very, very tiny kind of, you know, Rep
set kind of protocol and it works.
Whereas, you know, people with, you know, fraction of his experience and understanding and, and
capacity are trying to do far more complex things and it's just not really working at all.
But what we can say is then, yeah, a, a progression model is potentially an expectation management
tool, but also it could be a framework, you know, Cos headburns is both of those things.
It's a framework.
This is around what you're doing and it limits you and says you can't do in Hepburn eight sets of 2
rising to three.
You can't do anything other than eight sets and you can't do anything other than two or three
repetitions.
I mean, that's, that's kind of your limitations.
So it's a framework and it's an expectations management tool.
If you kind of take the classic kind of way that most people today are programming, bodybuilding,
kind of set Rep protocols, they're going to do the same number of sets most of the time.
OK, you've got some crazy people doing, you know, kind of all kinds of weird things.
But you know, like, fine, most people most of the time are doing the same number of sets per per
workout, per exercise.
And, you know, they're going to do sort of a Rep range.
And when they get to the upper end of that Rep range, they're going to, you know, switch the weight
up and they're going to start again at the bottom end of the Rep range.
And that's kind of what we saw actually today with the program that you introduced to where you've
got 5 to 10 repetitions.
And the idea being that you would start to five and then you would sort of increase up towards 10
and then you would add the weight and drop down back towards 5 again.
And then we made the point that practically speaking.
And that could be a little bit more malleable actually, if the equipment that you've got means that
when you get to the upper end of that Rep range, you then switch to the next weight up and actually
it drops you a little bit below your target starting point.
OK, well then you know, that's just what the equipment is forcing you to do.
So instead of it being 5 to 10, it might be 4 to 11.
And that that's just because that's the dumbbells that you've got access to, or that's the
selectorised machine that you want access to, and that's just pushing you in that particular
direction.
Now, technically, somebody could say, well, I just want to progress load.
And you can say, well, you're going to have a really, really difficult time with that unless you've
got like sort of really clever set up in your equipment.
You've got micro loading capacities.
And then technically, yes, you could stick around 5 or 6 reps all the time and you could micro load
and make sure that you're always capable of doing that.
Yeah, not many people are going to do that though.
Similarly, you could also kind of say, well, I'm just going to carry on increasing repetitions
forever or you're going to run in to fatigue issues by doing that.
Because the higher up the Rep range you go, the more you're going to start finding that you can't do
as many, you know, kind of other things in the workout.
You can't do very, you can't keep with your same kind of frequency protocols if you kind of bump up
against the top end of that Rep range.
So broadly speaking, you're probably always going to have to have what I guess some people call
double progression, which is, you know, I mean, it gets used, as you pointed out, in multiple
different ways, different people and different times.
But you could argue in this context, it just means, you know, I'm working with a weight progression
and a Rep range progression and I'm just going to manage those.
So I stay in this Rep range all the time and just allow weights to increase over time.
And The thing is that in the context of what a lot of people are doing, that process is just
happening on its own.
So we just go to the gym and we just lift to failure and we just write down where we get to or we
got to or where we are getting to or whatever.
And it's like, OK, well, this time I didn't make any progress.
OK, well, I write down that I didn't make any progress.
Next time I don't make any progress.
OK, well, I write that down again.
And the third time, OK, now I'm, I'm adding repetition.
OK, great, fantastic.
And then it just kind of happens gradually over time.
And then we just notice over a long period of time that progression is happening.
And the wording progressive overload is, as I say, really distracting because it, it sounds like we
should be doing something proactive, but it's not really the case.
It's just telling us that we are progressing over time.
And it's a totally valid way of, of, of, of, you know, making progress.
And, and you know, very fine that strength training program is, is working equally.
You could do the exactly the same thing and you leave 1 reserve all the time.
You know, that is doable.
You just have to be very clear with yourself about what one Rep in reserve feels like.
And then literally you are, you know, and that sounds like not a lot of silver era lifters were
actually doing just leaving that last Rep in reserve and just doing the exact same program.
So it doesn't have to be trained to failure to work in exactly the same way.
So, and I think that probably is the most practical answer for most people most time either 2
failure or one reserve within the range of you know and I like 5 to 85105 to 7, whatever you want to
do.
But again, I think it works with, you know, a larger number of Rep ranges than that.
Yeah, good.
So practically speaking, easy.
So you just you add a repetition as able to that could be once a week.
You know, some ways I like to do that for beginners.
I often say, look, every workout you're probably going to add a repetition to each exercise and each
set of that exercise.
And then for someone who's intermediate, well, it might be that we're adding a, a repetition to one
set each workout.
And then someone who's advanced, it might be we're trying to add 1 repetition to one set for that
exercise per week.
Obviously if you're doing multiple sets compared to single sets, if you're doing an AB split, you
know, that's going to differ a little bit.
But just as a, a bit of a rule of thumb, obviously beginners are gonna be progressing a lot quicker
than an intermediate, intermediate quicker than an advanced.
So you're saying, OK, let's add a repetition.
We get to the top of that drip range.
And what I think is an, a helpful practical point, and you've alluded to this is this stuff is going
to be based on the exercise.
It's based on the equipment.
So I might program people 5 to 10 and say, look, you know, we can do whatever exercise, We'll do
every exercise 5 to 10.
And I say you may find for the exercise you're doing, some exercises may have smaller loading
increments and you may just feel better going between 5:00 to 7:00, totally fine.
Other exercises, maybe you go down to five, the machine doesn't, just doesn't feel good.
Or maybe it's got, you know, large loading increments.
And so maybe you need to go from 6 to 10 or you go from 5:00 to 10:00.
I don't really mind.
Yeah, we're giving I, I would give people a, a window there where, hey, this needs to suit you and
it needs to suit the excise and it needs to suit the machine or the equipment you've got access to.
And then you get to the top of that range, whatever that is for you.
You add a little bit of load and you come back down.
Now there's two ways to do that.
I mean, really there's one way to do that, isn't there is you add the smallest increment of load
that you can right now, typically I would say to someone, ideally I want that to be about a percent
per repetition were coming down.
So you've gone from 5 to 10.
OK, we're gonna go back from 10 down to 5, just like what we saw at the start of this program.
And I want you to add fi about 5% total load because we're, we're going down 5 repetitions.
Now what I find with people is that 5% load, that 1% per repetition we're dropping, it should be, it
should be manageable for basically everyone.
Everyone should be able to do that and find, you know what, I've gone to five and I feel like I've
actually got a repertory in reserve now.
OK.
So I'm erring on on more of like a conservative side with that loading parameter and it again, it
allows me not to overshoot someone drop down to five, but I can't lift the load.
I feel demotivated whatever.
And worst case scenario, OK, we're two reps in reserve.
We're getting slightly less stimuli for that one week.
Well, it doesn't matter because next week we're upping it again, we're going to six.
So that's really practical way of of doing that, that double progression method, like you said
there, you mentioned it's hard sometimes to just add load.
I find if I'm using very low repetitions for people like sub five, my preference is to try to micro
load and to try to go, let's add a the smallest incremental load we can, ideally fractional plates
each workout each week.
And if that's too much, so you know, ideally we'll do something like a Hepburn method.
We MU we'll have multiple sets we're adding because usually if we're doing less than five years, we
will have multiple sets anyway.
And let's be realistic.
So then I'll say, let's add the smallest amount of load possible to one of those sets per workout of
per week.
And if that is still too fast of the progression, then I'll normally just go between 1 repetition
just like Hepburn did.
I'll go from 5:00 to 6:00 or from 4:00 to 5:00 and then back down.
So I find that the high repetitions or I guess maybe the way to think about it, the lower
repetitions we've got, it's, it's more viable to just be reliant on load.
And if we're using mortgage repetitions, we're really, we're gonna have to be using a repetition
scheme there as well, just progressing loading.
Yeah, totally.
I mean, but I would kind of, I would still want to frame that in the context that the, the limiting
factor in each worker really wants to be the either point of failure or the on ripping reserve or
two reps reserve or whatever reserve the person is going to do.
And then you're just getting feedback from the kind of loading protocols.
I mean, you're refining your kind of loading protocols to kind of land people in a particular kind
of reference.
That's all you're doing.
That's the sort of the, the science behind what you're kind of sort of doing there, which is, which
is cool because I mean, it's a management of expectations and a management of, of motivation, as
we've already pointed out, which is great, but it's not 100% necessary.
You know, you could just go with the flow of what the equipment gives you.
As I've said, kind of just, I get stuck in whatever kind of commercial gym I'm in and this
electroised machine is whatever it is.
And I kind of do kind of a week or two with a particular load.
And then like I put the weight up and I just see how many reps I get and it is what it is.
And that's OK, you know.
And especially for single sets that like that's for my own training, that's what I do with single
sets.
If I'm doing again, you know, say three sets of four to five repetitions, I'll be a little bit more
strategic in, in managing my expectation without loading.
But you know, I, it's not popular, but like, you know, I said this before, I think progressive
overload is overrated.
I really think this idea of like beat the logbook and it's been drilled into people and I understand
why and understand it was important.
But I feel like we've gone too far.
And I feel like now it actually, it causes anxiety in people and it, it's, it's now become a master.
And it's like, well, it was there all along just to serve us, to show us that in fact, we are
progressing in a workout.
We just going to be able to look back and show our are we progressing, you know, from 4 weeks ago or
two months ago or whatever.
And this idea that we need to be beating the logbook every single session.
It's just not realistic.
And and you know, you see this with a lot of the silver area guys.
How often will you look at a magazine or something and they'll be like, oh, this person, you know,
Steve would incline bench, you know, 10 repetitions of whatever, 135 LB dumbbells or whatever.
And you look at it and it's like, how often was he doing that for this to be recorded for you, for
everyone to know this is the way this guy does for incline bench.
What was he doing that for two years?
You know, like, how slow was this guy's progress that we knew that's what he lifted.
And the idea now that you need to progress every lift every week, aim to do it, sure.
But if you're an advanced lifter, I mean, you know, we've touched on this in the past, is at a
certain point, maybe some of those lifts are there just to maintain what you've got and you're not
actually going to progress them.
Yeah, absolutely.
And I have talked to people in the past who've who've made the same point to me in their own
training that are like, I'm really not seeing any growth on this exercise.
I'm just doing it because because if I don't, then I shall lose the Muslim that I've built.
Exactly.
Yeah, OK.
Dropping down a single set?
Do it twice a week.
That's just how it is.
But yeah, I mean, I think the, the, the, the key point here, the physiological reality is that the,
the improvement is a feedback mechanism to tell you that an adaption is happening.
And if it's a exercise that you're very familiar with, then that should be mostly hypertrophy.
And in an advanced sort of muscle, again, advanced lifter is a kind of a bit of an emotive term.
But if the muscle is kind of a very, very well developed state, then you know you're not going to
really see a very, very fast rate of progress.
And so it is going to be, you know, probably every kind of 3 or 4 workouts at best where you're
going to see reps increasing or the load increasing, you know, but fundamentally, that's just how
fast the muscle gains are going to be.
And there's not really anything we can do about that.
Well, not to remain a natural lifter anyway.
So is there anything else, practically speaking, that's a helpful tip for people to know.
I think it's helpful to people to know you're not going to always progress every single workout.
If you are, it's probably because you're doing new exercises and that's not actually helping you in
the way you think it's helping you.
So that's helpful.
We've talked about here's a progressive model.
You can use double progression, add a Rep when you get to the top of whatever range you're using,
add some load, come back down and go again.
We've talked about the fact that, hey, progressive overload is just there over time to show you what
you're doing is working.
It's not dictating your work, it's not pulling forwards adapt, it's not causing the muscle growth is
just feedback.
Is there anything else that would be helpful for people to know?
You've mentioned like, you know, going to that 0 reps in reserve or one Rep in reserve being that
sort of litmus test for working out your loading and whatnot.
And you know, honestly, that's probably one of the most important points here is, again, if the
parameters make sense, you're not doing stupid amounts of volume, you're not doing frequency.
That doesn't make sense.
If you are going to 0 reps in reserve, one Rep in reserve, 2 reps in reserve, and it truly is, then
that adaption has to be happening.
Really all, you've maxed out your size potential, right?
I think that's probably one of the most practical pieces here is a lot of these progression models
we're talking about, yes, A, the managing expectation, but B, they're also trying to keep people
accountable to training close enough to failure.
And as long as you're aware of that and you're aware, hey, you're not going to progress if you are 4
gaps in reserve, 5 gaps in reserve 6, like you just let that float away and you use the same load.
Sure, you're not going to progress because you have gotten stronger and you haven't added the load
over time and now you are 5 gaps in reserve.
So as long as you're aware of that and you are taking yourself to a close proximity to failure, then
all this other stuff, like I said, it's just feedback over time.
Any any other practical points for people?
Honestly, I think I just reiterate what I said at the beginning, which is that if your interest in
progressive overload and progress is more on the academic side and you're trying to understand, you
know, what it is that people are talking about when they're talking about progress and progressive
overload and what it means and how it connects to adaptations.
Just be aware that there are these two totally different usages or descriptions or kind of ways of
talking about it, which have come from 2 totally different places in the kind of strength training,
you know, historical context.
And so you will find that if you read certain sources or listen to certain people talk, you will be
getting either the kind of the block periodization culture, if you like, which I just fundamentally
don't think is describing what's going on correctly.
Or alternatively, you'll be getting this kind of more adaption, physiological kind of description of
what is happening in terms of progressive row load, which is the feedback, which is what we're
talking about.
So, you know, if you are interested in this area and you're reading and you're listening to people
talk about it and that kind of thing, just be aware that that is happening and that'll help you sort
of make sense of the ways that people are talking about it and why there are these disagreements and
and discrepancies.
But yeah, from a practical point of view, you know, most of the time I think most people are just
going to be able to start working with an exercise, try and work with a given Rep range and modify
as they go along by simply noticing what Rep range they land on when they put the weight up.
So if I go.
To basic, isn't it?
If I go like I've just started working out in the new gym a week and a half ago and there's a
really, really nice seated row machine which has a wonderful action, one of the best actions I've
come across in seated rows for a very long time.
So I really like it and it has it's selectorised.
And so I just put the kind of selector in on a weight and I got like sort of 6 or 7 reps, I forget.
And then I pushed that up to 8 and I thought, well, I'll put it up a little bit more, put it up the
next one.
And whatever reps I got is what the reps I got.
And then I shall now work in like the 5 to 9 or 5 to 8, whatever it is that I've discovered is
appropriate for that situation.
And it might actually change over time.
You know, you might find that as I get stronger on that machine, it just tweaks slightly because
some adaptations, the coordination stuff is stopping happening and it might affect the way that I'm
working in that.
I don't know.
But I'm not stressing about it.
I'm just going to work with to what the machine gives me.
Something based lifting gets this bad name, but overcomplicating things and this is so simple.
We're making this as simple as possible.
I don't know if if you've ever used like the old Nautilus equipment.
So the ones before they were like this selectorized stuff that had like the IT was this weird double
prong that would go in.
It was I didn't, I have no idea why they did it like that.
And so you'll have like each weight plate will have a hole and then you got this pin you go in
that's got two holes or two pins to go into holes and you just have no idea what weight you're
using, right?
Like I, I can't work out for the life me and the plates are barely numbered as it is.
And that has been a very useful tool in losing that emotional attachment to having to have this like
perfected progressive kind of model where I just, I don't know, it was a one up, one down.
I don't know.
I just put it in and I go to 0 reputation reserve and I got 6 reps out.
Great.
You know it doesn't.
It doesn't matter that much, does it?
Well, that's that's the thing.
I think you know if, if we are well, I mean just just being a bit kind of kind of clear there.
I mean, again, assuming that we're talking about single sets to failure, I mean things can get nasty
if we've got fatigue present from a previous set or a previous exercise with the same muscle group.
But you know, yeah, broadly speaking, you know, as if I'm going to use the, you know, the seated row
machine and I've just done a press before that and I do the press and then I, you know, it takes me
actually to because of the size of the gym I'm working and the different laws, I have to walk up.
I have to walk up, you know, different floor and mezzanine and across the way to get to the row
machine that I want to use, threading my way through all these, these different pieces of kit.
Get the the CD, roast it down, do a warp and then start.
And then it's like, OK, well, I did that number of I did that weight last time.
That's that pin there and then put the pin up.
OK.
And then I'll just get what reps I get and it's OK.
Well, then that just goes another book and then just do it again, do it again, do it again over the
next couple of weeks and see what happens.
And I think, I think there's definitely a tendency to be to be able to overthink and get like sort
of emotionally disturbed by either the lack of progress or whether or not they're doing it correctly
or anything like that.
And it's like you're, you're, you're, you're just recording feedback.
It's like, how strong are you on the day?
Fine.
It goes in the log book of of the as a piece of information and then just look at the trends over
time.
I don't think people should sort of are going to benefit sort of psychologically from trying to
force themselves to hit, you know, you know, sort of a new, you know, strength goal every single
time they go in the gym as a natural lifter.
I don't think that's a good idea.
You know, I think it's better to treat it as feedback and, you know, just do the best you can on
each day.
Yeah.
And you'll just see form technique will start to break down if if one.
Well, that's the that is, yeah, that is, that is definitely the risk.
Yeah, yeah.
It's so funny to think that people would think that a set done near failure might not cause
adaptations just because he didn't.
Well, that's the same thing really as I mean like ultimately that's the intensities sort of argument
where the volume argument is being made.
So like you made the comment about Mike Benser kind of sort of talking about needing to do an extra
Rep or hit failure or whatever in order to trigger the option.
Well, that's really just the intensity kind of view of what the volume guys are arguing, which is
that and unless you do more volume, you're not really going to figure.
And I mean, both of them are talking nonsense.
It's like, is the repetition stimulating or not?
If it is stimulating and qualitatively you have stimulated the adaption, quantitatively it might be
quite small, but qualitatively you cannot say that the adaption hasn't happened.
You know, and I think this is where physiologically, sort of starting physiologically and trying to
understand how things are actually being started, it's really, really important because it stops you
making these.
Ridiculously absurd claims like unless your, you know, intensity is off the charts, then nothing's
going to happen.
Unless your volume is off the charts, nothing's going to happen.
And it's, you can't do that from external parameters.
You can't do that with volume and, and you know, sort of intensity and things like that.
It's got to come from, you know, what is the physiological reality.
If stimulating Rep has happened, then hypertroid has been stimulated.
End of story.
Yeah.
Yeah, exactly.
That's OK.
I think that's it for us.
I've I've battled noisy birds a construction site you've.
Had a show today you.
Have this yeah.
So hopefully you guys will less distracted than I was.
We'll be back next week.
I mean, that's that's my reward for our one year and one week podcast episode.
But we'll be back next week with a new topic.
But just to quickly say, these topics that we've been doing lately have been topics you guys have
been asking for.
And so they've, you know, they've been selected from questions you guys have asked either myself or
Chris and you said, hey, we want to know more about this or I don't understand this topic.
That's helpful.
You know, we want it.
We want this stuff to be valuable to you guys.
So keep doing that.
Keep letting us know what kind of stuff you're interested in, what topics you feel like there's
maybe some ambiguity over.
If it's a topic we've covered in the past and maybe you know, we haven't covered it in depth as much
as you guys would find helpful, let us know.
OK, that's it.
Thank you guys for joining us.
We'll be back next week.