Episode: 041 New study shows twice as much volume doesn't cause extra muscle growth
URL: https://open.spotify.com/episode/3s6AYFqBXH8uv8ycHgGPuV
Published: 2026-03-02
================================================================================

Welcome back.
Thank you for joining us for another episode.
In today's episode, we are going to be talking about volume, high volumes.
And is high volume more effective for hypertrophy?
And I can't believe it.
I made a joke last week saying that we might even do another study review episode.
And lo and behold, that's what we're doing, a study review episode.
So Chris, I feel like you orchestrated this just to make a point based on my joke last week, but how
are you doing today?
I'm doing well.
Thanks, Jake.
I don't think I do orchestrate.
I think it kind of the study got sent to me a couple of days ago, so.
Just naturally happened.
Yeah, the universe supplying the the information from its for its own purposes.
And muscle Physiology, God's had it in mind.
So I'm going to introduce you guys to a workout plan.
And I've kept you in the dark on this one.
Chris, I haven't told you who it is.
I haven't told you what it is.
I'm gonna get you to guess.
I'm gonna I'm gonna tell everyone what the plan is and then I'm gonna get you to guess if it's
Silver Era or if it's Golden Era and we'll just go from there.
So bear with me everyone.
This is a bit of a difficult one to explain.
There's quite a bit here because it is a split routine, but I'm gonna give it my best.
SO work out one we have it's, it's a chest and a chin up day, chest and back day to an extent.
So we've got 7 sets of bench.
I'm not going to bother going through all the different repetitions.
He does pyramid and reverse pyramid, all this funny stuff.
OK, so I'm just going to give you guys the sets to condense it down a little bit.
So we've got 7 sets of bench supersetted with with seven sets of chin UPS.
Then we have dumbbell flies, five sets supersetted with five sets reps In general, we're about 5 to
15 for most of these exercises.
Work out two, we have a shoulders and arm day, so we have a dumbbell shoulder press for five sets.
Then we have barbell curls for five sets, Scott curls with an easy bar for five sets.
Scott curls with a dumbbell or dumbbells for five sets.
Then we've got seated triceps push down, five sets supersetted with standing triceps push down
South.
Two different triceps exercises back-to-back.
Again, most exercises here were done for sets of five.
Yeah, 5 to 15 repetitions.
And then we've got a ABS and legs day.
So for you guys who are keeping up, so workout one was done on Monday, next workout was Tuesday,
next workout was Wednesday.
So we are working on a consecutive days here.
And our ABS and legs started off with sit ups for 10 sets of 50 and then leg raises for five sets of
20.
Then side bends, which is genuinely an old school exercise.
So, you know, that could throw you off the scent a little bit of if this is a newer, older workout
plan.
And the side bends were done with a barbell, OK, so like a barbell behind the neck, like a squat
position.
And that was a five sets of 200 bends.
Then we get into our legs.
So then we've got five sets of squats and I mean I'm laughing because it's the only reasonably
volume thing in this whole workout plan.
And then we've got 510 sets of calf raisers, standing calf raisers again, the the leg stuff that
we're, we're 5 to 8 repetitions.
And then we've got another chest and back day on Thursday.
So we've got 7 sets of bench superseted.
This is not superset at this time.
So seven sets of bench.
Then we have 5 sets of behind the neck overhead press supersetted with five sets of rows.
And then we've got five sets of dumbbell overhead press and then five sets of dips.
So similar to our our other chest and back workout, but we've got AI assume saddle plane, maybe row
here instead of a pull up.
Next day we've got a back and arms day.
So we have three sets of military press.
We've got three sets of barbell curls.
We've got lost my Place where where we threw the barbell curls.
Then we've got three sets of French curls.
Then we've got a Scott bench barbell triceps exercise, which to be honest with you, I don't exactly
know where that is, and three sets of that three sets of Scott bench triceps exercise with a
dumbbell or dumbbells.
Then we've got our triceps push downs for three sets behind the neck, chin UPS for five sets.
We've got a torso machine for five sets.
I'm not exactly sure what the torso machine was.
I guess it was some kind of rotation.
And then we have 5 sets of lat pull downs.
Now if you're not nauseated yet, we've got one more workout.
So workout 6.
So Saturdays we had one day off in this whole routine and workout 6 was an ABS and legs day.
We have 5 sets of sit ups.
Again, we have 5 sets of leg raises, we have 5 sets of side bends, and now we've got eight sets of
squats.
However, the first three sets were heavy triples and then we go up to 20s and then we've got five
sets of front squat and then five sets of seated calf phrase instead of the standing calf phrase
that we had in the first lower body day.
So my first question, Silver or golden era?
So like you said, there are a couple of clues in here to the possible date of the program.
So the fact we've got Scott Curls here, I mean Scott Curls, Larry Scott was born.
In.
Early 40s, something like that.
So presumably 60s and 70s, he would have been kind of training with that exercise and making it
popular.
So it can't be earlier than that.
It can't be earlier than like 60s.
So it's got to be late silver, really early gold.
It can't be can't be early silver because Scott killed didn't exist.
So, well, obviously it might have existed, but there.
There would have been called.
The names it wasn't there so.
But on the other hand, dips are not a particularly common golden era exercise.
They're much more silver era type exercise.
I'm not saying a lot of machines, particularly a lot of leg raisers, sideman's, stuff like that.
Very, very silver era.
This is not a full on golden era program.
This has got to be late Silver.
So this is Sergio Oliva.
So we're talking late 60s, I believe he said he was using this in in 1970.
So I think you're you're you're pretty pretty much on the money there at the timeline.
Yeah.
So as far as routine, so obviously this would have been around the time who's winning Olympias.
So obviously he was, you know, very successful and this routine was working for him or something I
should say was working for him.
What do you, what do you make of this routine?
What's standing out to you?
Well, I mean, anybody is gonna say it's obviously super high volumes and very, very much a body part
split routine.
Actually excise selection.
I haven't got a lot of complaints.
I think there's a lot of exercises in here within the constraints of not having all the interesting
machines that we have access to today.
You know, there's a lot of good, not a really nice exercise selection.
I mean, I like the fact they've got chin UPS in there.
I like the fact there's dips in there.
You know, I like the different pressing variations.
There's rows in there, you know, a couple of different curl variations, yeah.
He's even got like close grip and wider grip back exercises and like he's quite diverse.
This, this stuff, this the stuff that I'm not seeing.
I mean, I don't remember that he had any deadlift variations.
So there's the hamstrings again.
Well.
There's no hamstrings at all.
I mean that that's another point that you should have made when you were saying late silver.
Yeah, I didn't really need those though.
I kind of honestly, I I saw the Scott curl.
I'm like, well, that kind of gives me a starting point.
It's got to be late silver straight away.
But then I looked the XR selection, I'm like, it doesn't have enough golden era machine type stuff
in that to really be golden era.
So it kind of just gets squeezed between the two periods of time.
Early, old, late silver.
So very late silver, really.
Yeah.
But you make a good point with the exercise selection apart from the hamstrings and obviously some
of the two like the I guess wrecked fan this, you're getting the leg raised, but obviously you don't
have a leg extension in there.
But apart from that, these exercises are kind of covering everything fairly nicely.
Like if you were to take all of these exercises and the on his days because he trained everything
twice a week.
So I didn't.
Rebuild it as a sensible program, Yeah.
Yeah, like the frequency itself is OK.
The split itself is not even that bad.
I don't like that he's got a a arms day and a chest day back-to-back.
So I would jig this split a little bit.
But if you were to to take that frequency and you were to just rejig the exercises instead of having
a seated calf raise one day and standing the other day, Yeah, it's arguably and drop the the sets
down to maybe single sets per exercise.
Arguably, this would be a good plan.
Yeah.
It just needs some hamstrings in there.
And yeah, reorganizing into an upper lower split and that'd be all right.
I yeah, I don't know why he chose this split.
It is an odd one.
I do think it's interesting though, that frequency was still high.
This is something.
Just had a reason to be out of the house every day.
Sometimes it's just straight and low.
Do you?
I mean, like, sometimes it could just be something really kind of prison.
Well, I mean, I guess it could be that he didn't like doing low body by itself.
I mean, his leg day.
I couldn't help laughing at the first leg day.
There was 1 quad exercise, no hamstring exercise and one calf exercise.
But then you you look at the the chest or the back or the the arms day and there's like 5, there's
like 4 girls.
Yeah.
Yeah.
So maybe you just chase his feet because he didn't like training legs.
Yeah, OK.
Is, I don't know that there's a lot we need to say about this.
Just incredible volumes.
The point I was going to make is we do see this with these early golden era plans, while volume just
go through the roof, you do see the frequency stay the same and they're still training everything
two or three times a week, which I think is an interesting observation that when we get to this
later golden era, obviously, and even after that, obviously it starts to shift.
Any other observations or comments you want to make?
Oh, no, not really.
I mean, I think we'll just be going over ground that we've been over many times before some of these
programs really.
But it's interesting to see something totally different for a change.
So we're going to continue the volume conversation where you're going to take us with it.
So as you said, there's a new study that is doing the rounds that people are interested in.
It's called large increases in resistance training volume do not impair skeletal muscle hypertrophy
or anabolic catabolic molecular signalling in trained individuals.
And it was issued on pre print in, well literally kind of a few days ago, 24th of February.
So you can probably get a free copy quite easy on the Internet.
So yeah, people are talking about it.
So let's just jump in and say some things that not everybody might have said.
Yeah.
So what's it about?
Well, basically it's a training study, so.
And it's a training study in strength training people.
So straight away it kind of hits the sweet spot for the thing that the Internet is most interested
in.
So basically they had a within subject design.
So everybody did both training programs, one with one leg and one with the other two exercises, leg
press and knee extension.
And essentially one leg did a kind of high volume and the other did leg did a super high volume.
Yeah, Basically, yeah.
And they kind of they, they, they come and did it as a start, starting from what people were already
doing.
So they increased kind of volumes from what people were previously doing.
And I think basically they ended up on average kind of about, and it's a twice a week training
programmes.
They're doing like 9 sets per workout twice a week.
And the low volume or lower volume like which is still absolutely off the charts for we would
consider to be sensible.
And then the other leg I think that was doing sort of like 16 or so sets per workout.
So essentially 18 sets or 32 sets per week.
So we would say probably 2-2 workouts a week.
You're probably capping out at around about 5 sets per muscle root per workout.
So the fact that the the lower of the two in this category is is at 9 is kind of way off the top end
almost double or we would consider to be recoverable or sensible.
And that was over 2 exercises, wasn't it?
Correct leg press and knee extension.
So, you know, it would have been obviously worse if they're doing full stretch position exercises
all the time, but obviously the knee extension make things slightly less problematic.
Also two-minute rest periods between sets.
So with a 9 to 12 kind of Rep range, it makes it very much a kind of, you've got a lot of metabolite
related fatigue and a lot of lactate and blood creating a big cardiovascular response.
So people are going to be experiencing a very big reduction in the number of reps they can achieve.
And, and just to kind of be clear what we're saying here, this is not changing the way muscular
failure works.
Muscular failure works exactly the same irrespective of whether you are experiencing RPE from the
cardiovascular or the metabolite related fatigue sources.
You're just going to hit task failure when you give up.
That's the same in every single situation.
It doesn't change whether you're doing the first set or the last set in this particular situation,
but it does change the amount of superspinal CNS fatigue and therefore the level of motive.
So the people who are kind of hitting those, you know, kind of super high volumes with one of the
legs and they're doing like, you know, whatever it was 16 sets kind of per workout.
It just sounds strange to even say it.
Then obviously towards the end of that sixteen sets with two-minute rest periods, there's going to
be a lot of metabolite fatigue, There's going to be a lot of cardiovascular sensations.
You're going to be barely hitting meaningful levels of recruitment by the time you hit the end of
that kind of workout.
Doesn't mean that muscular failure is any different from how it would be at the beginning of that
workout.
It's just how you get there.
What fatigue mechanisms are present when you hit that?
Fairly pointless, slightly different.
Yeah, yeah.
So they they kept repetitions fairly consistent for so sets failure so they would have had to adjust
the load.
Correct.
OK.
So in which case, yeah.
But the the fundamental point is that the reason the loads were going down was because of the motin,
a large part because the motin occurred reduction.
Yeah.
And you made the point there about like which fatigue mechanisms lead to that point.
I mean, ultimately the, the one of the main I guess variables there would be the rest period.
Yeah, if the rest period was.
Short, longer and that's what made the rest period longer.
Then you'd end up with more calcium.
I'm related to fatigue playing a role and less of the metabolite and super spinal fatigues playing a
role.
So in a way, by keeping the rest period shorter, you're kind of making it less damaging.
Really.
It's a little bit more protective.
Yeah, it's funny, isn't it?
It's like 2 bad mistakes, 22 bad choices.
Kind of like lead to a better outcome.
Yeah.
So, so that's kind of basically the study design.
That's kind of what they were doing.
And they took a whole bunch of measurements, obviously starting out with muscle cross-sectional area
as their primary measurement, to see whether there's any difference in hypertrophy, at least
hypertrophy as judged by the whole muscle size.
And they didn't.
They got a significant increase in both groups, both legs, but they didn't see any differences
between groups.
So I guess our first kind of observation, you know, moving away from the framing of this
investigation from the point of view of the researchers, but just kind of taking a step back and
saying, OK, well, what's this telling us?
It's telling us that higher volumes at this super high volume level are not actually giving you any
bigger benefits.
So if you're kind of looking for a starting point on this study, like what is it telling us?
It's telling us that you kind of go from 9 sets per workout twice a week to 16 sets of, you know, 16
sets per workout twice a week.
It's not doing anything positive.
It's not giving you a benefit, at least not in the context of where you've got these enormous
amounts of fatigue happening within the session.
I mean, that's pretty significant in and of itself.
Well, I think people are missing it because they're looking at the framing of the study, which the
framing of the study is, does this create AU shaped curve?
Does it create a curvature back towards a reduction?
And they're expecting to see this extra damage, which I already pointed out they're probably not
creating because the Super spinal fatigue is stopping you doing that.
But you kind of they're expecting to see a U-shaped curve.
So it's that the higher volume is creating less hypertrophy than the sorry, the Super high volume is
creating less hypertrophy than the the high volume.
But the reality is, you know, that wasn't that wasn't apparent.
So but you know, if that's their framing, we can look at it from a different framing because there
are other people in the industry who think that you just linearly increase volume and it linearly
increases the amount of hyper.
I mean that there are people out there.
Who and I think the dominant view would be that they would have expected higher, more hypertrophy
from higher volumes like I think certainly.
Three or four years ago, yeah, I think maybe the sort of things have moved on in the last couple of
years.
But yeah, certainly three or four years ago the dominant narrative would have been you kind of
nearly double the the volume you'd expect to get some more hypertrophy happening.
So, so that's kind of where I would start.
I'd say like, let's just kind of take that kind of observation off and note that, you know, it has
kind of, it does change things a little bit for us really.
The other thing I would then kind of go on to is like this idea of there being AU shape.
And I've already addressed that to a certain degree by saying that if you're using short rest
periods, you are essentially adding in more superspinal CS fatigue.
You're kind of keeping metabolites kind of in the muscle.
You're going to kind of keep the muscle a bit more protected against fatigue and calcium ions as it
gets further and further into the workout.
So you're not really allowing that extra damage to happen, which may be one of the reasons why you
wouldn't then see a big difference between the two groups in terms of damage and the suppressive
effects of that damage on the kind of hypertrophy effects.
So that would be the first thing I would observe in that.
Particular.
So maybe just expand that a little bit more because people may have missed that.
So you're saying that some people would expect that there would be less hypertrophy with higher
volumes and the expectation with that would be that the higher volumes are causing so much muscle
damage that that's going to impair the hypertrophic response in future workouts?
Yeah.
So basically so in in this question or in this kind of area, you've got two kind of different
approaches or explanation or explanatory frameworks, if you like.
The one that they will be operating in will be the proposal that Philippe de Mass was kind of
instrumental in promoting in 20/15/2016.
And he basically argued and I think, oh, it doesn't really matter.
But anyway, the, the, the kind of the, at the time it was being argued and, and he was kind of one
of the, the foremost proponents of this idea was that if you create a lot of muscle damage during a
workout, then that pulls resources away from the hypertrophic processes that are building new muscle
tissues.
So essentially it was a, it was a split between the previous people who've been sort of still very
much flirting with the idea that muscle damage could be a stimulus hypertrophy.
And really Philippe's work was instrumental in pushing many of the hypertrophy researchers away from
that as a concept.
So so.
It's kind of separate to the whole fatigue conversation.
Well, what it's saying is that muscle damage as a fatigue kind of mechanism would require muscle
protein synthesis rate elevations to repair it and as a result, it would pull resources away from
the MPs that is dedicated towards producing hypertrophy.
I'm not actually a massive fan of this argument because I actually think that the muscle damage
repair processes are not occurring simultaneously in time to the hypertrophy processes.
And I'm happy to argue with that, argue that with anybody really.
I think I've got some really good data showing that they're, they're actually not, you know, kind of
contemporaneous, but it is nevertheless a very influential idea and you will see a lot of
hypertrophy researchers kind of defaulting back in that direction now.
So I think that's probably what they are thinking.
They're thinking ultimately damage is going to be pulling resources away from hypertrophy and
therefore stopping it from happening.
I would argue that it's a simple fatigue process whereby the various different damage that kind of
relate to mechanisms, calcium, I'm made for D mechanisms and also post workout super spinal CSPD are
going to suppress our ability to stimulate hypertrophy in the future.
So I think they're, they're kind of two different explanatory frameworks, but they kind of end up
getting to the same point.
So if somebody looks at this study and go goes, Oh, well, this is what Chris would say.
And it's like, well, yes and no, We're saying the same thing for different reasons.
Well, they only end up at the same point in so far as the rest periods are or are not protective to
an extent.
Well.
Because, because would you say that this study could have been conducted in a way?
Again, again, that's that's another discrepancy between the model that I'm using and the model that
they're using.
They would probably.
Based on your model, you could have had a different outcome here where there there potentially there
may have been a reduction in hypertrophy in the extra high volume group if some of these variables
were a little bit different.
If some of these variables have been a little bit different, then we might have seen a bit of a
difference.
But again, we'll come on to something else that's different, which actually you raised with me at
the very beginning when I sent you the paper a couple of days ago, which is?
Still within.
Not your, which is still in, we're talking about in circles.
Let me just kind of walk through this.
So basically the way that I would look at this study is firstly to say, you know, what is the
damaging kind of capacity of each of these two different workouts, one for each leg.
And I've, as I've pointed out, the use of short rest periods or short term rest periods pushes you
towards the higher volume group, highest volume group, having a less damaging effect than you might
predict it to have because you're reducing recruitment quite a lot.
You're filling the muscle with metabolites, you're preventing calcium ion related fatigues from
really getting a foothold.
So even though you're doing all this extra volume, it's not really having as much of A damaging
effect as you might expect it to in comparison with a similar workout where you had say 4 minute
rest periods or something like that.
Now it's just not gonna be quite as problematic.
So that would be the first observation that is important in the context of the model that I'm
working with, which is very much understand how fatigue works.
And I'll tell you what the results are gonna be.
Also, and this is really important, what we've got here is a within subject design.
So, you know, this was literally the very first thing that you said when I sent you the paper like a
few days ago.
You said, oh, it's within subject design.
So we've got a post workout superspinal CNST problem, which is exactly what happens.
So we create some muscle damage in either leg and that muscle damage then triggers an inflammatory
response in that leg.
And then that washes out into the bloodstream heads towards the brain.
And now you've got a superspinal fatigue effect that affects the whole body, both legs.
So whatever damage you create in the highest volume leg affects your ability to recruit bone,
recruit motor units in both legs.
So so you get to the next workout and you can't recruit motor units in either of the two legs
because you've got all this muscle damage still present from the previous workout and you're now
just stuck in limbo.
So the reality is both legs get affected negatively by the presence of the muscle damage of the
highest volume leg.
So I'm not surprised that you end up with the same hypertrophy in both groups.
And actually by the end of the program, probably about the same muscle damage in both groups because
you just can't change the recruitment levels differently because you've got the same supraspinal
fatigue for both both body parts.
And this is the error that they made, and this is the error that I keep seeing in every single
hypertrophy study that I have a problem with Every time.
It's because the hypertrophy searches are not actually starting from a model of fatigue that
actually works.
They're they're, they're not reading the literature outside of their own little kind of silo and
they're not taking the time to work through what post workout fatigue actually involves, what even
interest session fatigue actually involves and how it's going to affect the variables that they're
manipulating.
And so they end up in situations like this where they're going, oh, we used within subject design
because it's going to give us the answer we want.
No way.
Which is interesting because a lot of people think very highly of within subject design.
Oh, it is fantastic in some scenarios, but as soon as you get to a point where superspinal fatigue
is being produced by large amounts of muscle damage, then it doesn't work anymore because both legs,
both arms, or all parts of your body get hit by the same kind of fatigue mechanism.
And it just suppresses the Moto nuclear.
And incidentally, when there's a discussion in the paper, which is very cool, which I actually
laughed when I read the paragraph in the introductory section because I was like, OK, because they
actually talk about how their review of rodent studies influence this study design.
I'm like, OK, so rodent studies are OK now, are they?
When you, when you look at them, it's not OK when I look at them, but they're the same rodent
studies that I've seen, you know, 100 times.
I mean, they're really cool studies, but they show that, yeah, increasing kind of amounts of muscle
damage do occur with, you know, increasing amounts of kind of excessive amounts of volume.
And then it has an inhibitory effect on signalling as inhibitory effects on, you know, what you can,
you know, make the muscle do.
In terms of growth.
As we talked about actually in our previous study review, and I didn't plan this, but as we talked
about, we talked about how there's a difference between human kind of situations and animal
situations.
If you're using electrical stimulation in the animal situations because you bypass the entire CNS,
so you don't get the protective effect of the CNS, you don't have that earlier kind of prevention of
you kind of creating the damage again in subsequent workouts.
You just keep piling damage or at least calcium on top of calcium on top of calcium because you're
electrically stimulating the muscle directly.
You don't have that if you've got superspinal CNFT stopping you're doing in the 1st place.
So that's what we're seeing here.
We're not seeing a clean kind of connection between the animal over excessive volume research and
the human excessive volume research in the same way, because the humans have got that superspinal
CNS fatigue happening and the animals don't because you're electrically stimulating the muscle.
Fundamentally not actually any different from a fatigue point of view, it's just happening at
different points in the chain from the brain down to the actual cross bridge formations.
So in a way the superspinal CNS fatigue is setting a cap on both legs for the hypertrophy that can
be seen.
So that's that's always like that's given us our ceiling.
Neither leg now is going to be able to exceed that.
Well, it's why you don't get EU shape that you're expecting to see.
So what they're expecting to see was suppressed hypertrophy in the highest volume group compared to
the lower of the two volume groups.
And what I'm saying is when super spinal fatigue is present that inhibits both legs, you won't get
that extra suppression in the high volume group because it's happening on both groups at the same
time.
Yeah, because you were getting suppression in the lower volume group that you wouldn't have been
getting otherwise, which is, I mean This is why I was pushing you before when when I was saying
you're looking at this really different model than than they are.
This is why the DEMAS model will give you give them their expected answer, and it's why my model
will give them the answer that they actually discovered.
Exactly, exactly.
So, you know, you could be scratching your head looking at this.
Why didn't we get what we expected?
It's because you don't understand.
The irony is that people are going to draw the conclusion that muscle damage doesn't impair
hypertrophy from this.
So they're, they're just, they're fundamentally not understanding that this, that they're seeing
muscle damage as a as a resource extractor instead of as a fatigue mechanism, which suppresses
recruitment through the inflammatory process.
Yeah, yeah.
So one important I think observation of this is if the lower volume group is being potentially
hindered in it's hypertrophy because of the higher volume leg, well that's telling us that super
spinal CNS fatigue is affecting the entire.
At these volumes, yeah.
At these volumes, so if we go back to the golden era plan, we started with those very high volumes
that we're doing that Sergio was doing well, the future workout for a different muscle will be
negatively impacted by that.
So if you are doing these really high volume workouts and you're doing a split where you're training
on consecutive days, your consecutive day, if you were doing upper, lower 6 sessions a week, well
those days we are training after another workout, which is almost all those workouts is going to be
negatively impacted even if it's a different muscle entirely.
Yeah, absolutely.
I mean the kind of the Super divided training split type, you know, kind of different muscle every
day of the week type idea is definitely going to run into this problem.
So people are going to the gym and just smashing, you know, delts to pieces with 9101112 sets, you
know, then the following day trying to do legs, it's not really going to work out well for them.
I mean, that's, you know, that's just kind of how this this model works.
Yeah, it's interesting.
You know, we've talked about a couple of programs so far, I think 1 of Dorians and then also Menses
where they were really clear that they wanted to have a rest day between each session even though
they were following splits.
They weren't even doing full body.
And I really like that idea.
If I am nowadays often and I've got two groups of doing this, when I do give people splits, I try to
have a rest day between each workout.
So I think people are this underestimating.
I would kind of, I've noticed a problem with that terminology because when people hear the word
rest, they kind of think tiredness, they think something to cardio, they think autonomic nervous
system.
They start sliding down the hill towards the wrong part of the exercise kind of science literature,
and they start thinking that it's got something to do with the heart muscle.
And they start, yeah, it just, it all just kind of falls apart.
And then they they lose the the framework that they need to be in.
What we're talking about here is that muscle damage is going to create an inflammatory response that
the brain is going to detect.
And yeah, me feel a little bit tired.
It's got nothing to do with what the heart has been doing.
It's literally just the inflammatory response to the mustard that you're repairing.
So when we say rest, it really should be referred to as repair.
Yeah.
What we're actually doing in that repair day, if we actually just change the terminology and said to
people don't say rest anymore, say repair days.
If you take a repair day, then suddenly now your brain is, is is focused on the thing that matters,
not on the thing that doesn't matter.
Because if you say rest, it's like, oh, I'm cardiovascular or they think.
Yeah, I don't feel like I need it.
Each of these I feel like I no, it's a repair day.
It's not a rest day, It's a repair day.
If you start using that terminology, things actually start to kind of bend in the right direction.
Now you're not going to work.
So I've, I've, I've seen Anna say it much more on the SNC side, to be honest, rather than in the
kind of bodybuilding side.
But you know, it still does affect us in bodybuilding as well.
Yeah, it's interesting that because there's not many other words that have their connotation because
even if you call it a recovery day, it's like, well, that still feels like the same.
Machine.
Yeah, it has to be called a repair day, really, for it to fit, make people to think in terms of
what's actually happening.
And then they stop going, well, I don't feel like I need one or I don't feel.
I don't care what you feel like, It doesn't matter.
Yeah, Yeah.
No, that's interesting.
That's a good point.
Cool.
So yeah, basically what we've done then is we've kind of walked through a study design.
We've walked through, you know, a couple of the basic results, not very much of it so far, can do
that in a moment.
And we've kind of described the two major kind of implications. 1, you know, bigger volumes aren't
producing more muscle growth, but also secondly, in the context of this study design, we're not
expecting to see particularly different muscle, muscle size increases, hypertrophy from the two
groups fundamentally because of the within subject design creating superspinal fatigue as a problem.
So you know, kind of 22 interesting observations straight away.
I've got a bunch of other kind of comments to make, but they're not quite as fundamental.
One of them, no particular order, one of them basically no fascicle length increases in this study
of any kind.
This is just yet one more study in the list of studies that keeps coming out, which is that strength
trained people don't get to increase muscle fascicle length.
It just it increases for the first kind of couple of months of Max and after that you just can't get
an increase happening.
So given that fascicle length increases are very closely linked to sarcomearogenesis in all the
animal model data that we've got, given that we're starting to get sarcomerogenesis data now coming
out in humans paralleling fask length increases.
What this is telling us is that sarcomerogenesis is not happening in humans after the first couple
of months of training fundamentally for the reasons that I've explained, which is that you can't
keep adding sarcomers indefinitely because you need a very, you need a smaller number of sarcomers
to create the passive tension necessary to stimulate the adoption.
So it's just piling on data that we've already got.
It's nothing new, it's just more of the same.
And obviously being a quads study, then we were expecting that we would have seen it.
Expecting to see exactly fast collecting increases in psychomagnosis in in humans very, very
sensitive muscle to that particular adoption.
Strength training people, you don't get the adoption.
So yet one more data point, adding in the direction that I've been kind of pointing for the last
couple of years on the same observation, there was also no increase in panation angle.
Now this starts to open a can of worms because ultimately you kind of need panation angles for
meaningful increases in muscle size.
If people want to go away and start sort of hacking the numbers from the from the charts, they do
actually give the numbers, which is quite nice.
It shows, I think it's approximately about a 10% increase in muscle size.
Now that increase in muscle size is literally on the edge of the noise that you could create from
muscle swelling.
So muscle swelling kind of is limited bounded between about in, in.
OK, just to be clear, when I say muscle swelling in this context, I'm describing because people are
going to Take Me Out of context and misunderstand what I'm saying here.
The data we've got for muscle swelling in the post workout period for strength trained people doing,
you know, kind of relatively high volume strength training workouts of dynamic standard normal
bodybuilding type contractions, so not eccentrics.
So literally maybe sort of eight to 10 sets, so not far away from what we're talking about here, you
kind of get a swelling of about between 2% and 10% or 2% and 8%.
That kind of ballpark figure had around about sort of 48 to 72 hours.
You haven't got a lot of data past that point.
So that's kind of, now most of that doesn't hit significance because of the way that those studies
are constructed and people kind of make a really big deal about that.
And so it's not significant.
Therefore, I'm going to ignore it.
And like every single one of those studies is numeric, like literally every single one is
numerically above baseline and they're in that zone of 2 to 8% or thereabouts.
And so if you subtract that from these kind of muscle sort of size increases, you pretty much
obliterate the entire gain.
So given that you've got no pennation angle increase.
Now the measurement here has taken the nine to six hours, which is not the same as what we're
talking about with those numbers, so I don't have data to match that up.
But one of the things that people don't realise about muscle swelling is that it does rise to a peak
around 3 or 4 days post workout if you create enough muscle damage, which clearly we are doing.
So, oh, just to be clear when I say clearly we are doing, we've got calpain markers showing that
we've got damage happening and it's bigger than it was at the beginning of the study.
So you have got damage happening, which is I guess another point that we could make, which is that
some people have argued that if you kind of just do enough volume for long enough, then that kind of
damaging effect magically goes away by some kind of magical repeat about effect that has never been
observed ever.
So you know, there is damage happening and it is greater than it was at the beginning of the eight
week training programme when people were doing whatever it was 6-7 sets twice a week instead of 9 or
16 sets twice a week.
So there is a possibility and I'm not making the case here that it is happening and I don't need to
make the case for this study review to work for me.
I'm just pointing out that this is not, it is not outside the realms of possibility that the lack of
a pinnation angle increase at the same time as the markers of damage could imply that much of that
muscle size increase on the whole muscle level is actually simply a muscle swelling effect.
Now, I wouldn't go so far as to say that the fact that other measures of muscle size didn't increase
is meaningful.
So they did do fibre CSA measurements and they didn't increase significantly.
You could argue that maybe that's indicative of the whole muscle size not necessarily being a real
change, but honestly there's hundreds of studies out there where muscle fibre CSA doesn't increase.
It's just because it's a horrible measurement to try and take SO.
Why would they do?
Because they did type 1, type 2 and then mix.
Just a horrible measurement take.
It's extraordinarily difficult to get very accurate, reliable measurements of most fibre CSA.
Is.
There any value in?
Your opinion?
He's done, he's talked about this in a lot of detail.
He's done some very good analysis on this.
So I would just refer to him and say, look, just listen to what Stu says.
He's described how difficult those measurements are and why you often don't get a significant effect
when you, when you're expecting to see 1.
So I, I would probably, he could even go as far as to agree with you and say it may not even be
worth doing if we can't get decent kind of, you know, measurements of that nature in this context.
So I wouldn't, I wouldn't say, Oh yeah, because fibre CSA didn't increase and muscle, whole muscle
CSA did increase.
Therefore it's clearly swelling.
I would never go that far because I don't think that the fibre CSA is telling us that information.
I think what it's telling us is that same thing it's telling us for every other study when it
doesn't increase.
It's just a horrible measurement to try and take.
It's hard.
So.
But yeah, in terms of what else I'm seeing, I'm seeing damage increasing, I'm seeing the muscle size
increase being within the noise or just outside the noise of what a muscle swelling could be.
Huge volumes being used in the context of the study, no pination angle increase.
All of that together kind of suggests it could be influenced by swelling.
I wouldn't want to push that, and I don't need to push that to fit this model, this study into my
model.
But I think it's just people worth worth people being aware that that is a possibility.
So you mentioned the the Cal pain increase and how that suggests muscle damage.
Do you recall was there a difference between the high and high volume groups in that?
No, I don't think so.
I don't think so, no.
But again, if you're kind of starting to suppress the recruitment levels in both legs, you wouldn't
really see any difference.
In that tap anyway to how much damage you can be able to cause?
Yeah.
I wondered if that would affect it.
Interesting.
Any any other observations?
Not really.
I mean ultimately it's just one of those study.
I mean, I would have been delighted if they'd taken a couple of different measurements of the muscle
damage stop by, except that is just really difficult to do.
But yeah, I mean, if they've got a little bit of kind of analysis on the on the nature of the
damage, but whether that would have told you that thing, I don't know.
It would have been nice to get, you know, sort of a post workout swelling measurement after the
first workout of each leg.
That would have been really nice and that would have been wonderful.
But honestly, the way they put the study together, I thought was pretty kind of cool for
demonstrating exactly what I would predict to happen.
And then it did happen.
So yeah, the fatigue model that I'm operating with fits perfectly with this study outcome, and I
don't think many other people's do.
So either you've got people who say that increasing volume or always increases muscle growth and
that's clearly not the case, Or you've got people saying that muscle damage is, you know, kind of
pulling away resources from hypertrophy, which I'm not really a fan of.
I think it's an OK explanation.
I think it's not.
I don't think it's necessarily 100% wrong.
I just think that two things are happening at different time points.
So it's very hard for it to be that way.
So if a team model works much better.
You know how you you absolutely love speculating and you love it when I ask you this, if this study
had been done in not within subject.
So say you had one group that did the the high but not as high volume.
The other group did the very high volume.
How do you think that those results may have differed from what we actually have here?
If the exact workout protocols were followed with the short rest periods, it might not have been
that different.
You might have got a little bit less growth.
So like refer back to the the extreme volume study that was done.
I think that was a Cody Horn study.
So go back to that one where you see if you take out intracellular and extracellular water, one of
the only studies that's ever done that.
I mean, I keep coming back to it and everyone keeps ignoring it.
Interestingly, I noticed that.
So it was actually a topic of discussion in on Instagram.
Just after I did my Instagram questions.
I think people were talking about how the maintenance literature is very clearly the sort of
demonstration that the atrophy happens in a training week.
And you can tell when people are arguing with you for the sake of arguing and just defending their
own power bases, or whether they're arguing with you trying to figure out an answer very simply by
do they register the fact that you've raised the maintenance literature?
If they interact with you when you said maintenance, they're actually going to be a a person who's
interested in finding the answer.
If they literally just let that information sail past them, ignore it and talk about something else,
they're not actually engaging with you in good faith.
They are just trying to build their own little power base of whatever, you know, kind of nonsensical
model that they think they've got going.
Ultimately, nobody will talk to us about the maintenance of literature.
They literally just refused to to pay any attention to it because there is no other explanation.
I've not heard anyone posit any other.
Explanations.
It's not that they just won't posit other explanations.
They actually will not refer to it.
They pretend it doesn't exist.
They literally like just ignore it and might hope that it will go away And we just keep talking
about it because there is no other explanation for that literature.
And there's I even sent, I found another study the other day and I sent it to you.
Yeah, I mean, that's the thing.
We're not talking about one study like, you know, these multiple studies.
We're showing the same thing.
So this is the point though.
So we get to situations where you make an observation and it's like if if nobody else is prepared to
talk about it and you know that you've got something that actually is unexplainable by any other
mechanism.
And the maintenance literature is a perfect example of that.
As I was talking about earlier, I was just thinking about applying that exact same framework.
Something else we're talking about here?
What we're talking about you're.
Talking about the Cody Horn study with the.
Extreme volume.
So I keep raising that exact same study and saying, you know, here one of the only ever studies to
deduct the actual water content from the muscle to arrive at muscle mass increases.
And everyone else is fiddling around with ultrasound studies going, oh, we're going to show that
there's no swelling in the post workout.
I don't care.
Look at the Cody Horn study.
They're like fiddling around trying to say, Oh yeah, well we can show that there's no swelling in
this situation.
Unlike Cody Horn's already shown that there's massive amounts of swelling, literally measured
intracellular and extracellular water during the training programme demonstrating to you that you've
got a build up of water inside the muscle.
And if you deduct that, you end up actually, and I would deduct both intracellular and extracellular
because I, I think correctly argue that there's, there's swelling from both of those sources.
So you those, you actually end up with a reduction in muscle size after that extreme volume training
program.
So ultimately, I think that until people repeat those that, that repeat that, that extreme volume
study with the same technology with other volumes and, and what have you, we're not really going to
have a better idea of how swelling is contributing.
But I think, you know, swelling absolutely could contribute in this particular study.
I just, I wouldn't, I can't quite to get to the point where I would be confident about saying it
definitely is what's happening.
But coming back to your question, which is about, you know what would happen if you had two separate
groups, then yeah, you might see if you were to deduct all of the swelling both intracellular and
extracellular, you might see that the higher volume group, parallel group will actually less but
well off in terms of muscle size corrected for intracellular and extracellular water by the end of
the training program.
But if you did that without correcting it, you might not find.
That and you think if you corrected for that within this study as it stands, you probably still
wouldn't find a significant difference between yeah, because you'd have the Super spinal to take
effect in both?
Yeah, yeah, interesting.
So the key points key take away points from this study.
More volume beyond a certain point does not equal more hypertrophy.
That's probably the the key #1 because these are within volumes that people would would be happy to
say should be causing more hypertrophy.
Really.
I mean, I, I, no, I think there's probably a big chunk of the, even the like, if you divide things
into science based and evidence based, which I keep doing and people again, ignoring the observation
because they don't want it to be true.
But there's a science based which is kind of like focused on trying to understand how the world
works.
And that's the bit that the evidence people screech about and say, no, no, no, you're not allowed to
do that.
Like, no, we want to actually know how it works.
We don't just want to.
And then they, oh, no, you're messing around with mechanisms.
No, I'm trying to understand how it works.
So we want to know how it works.
Then there's the evidence based group who just want to look at what the latest study tells them to
believe.
And then they believe that and it doesn't matter how it works, they're just not interested.
And then you've kind of got the the sort of sequential kind of parallels sequential concentric
circles of like further and further away from that in terms of fitness industry who's interested in
research to their varying different degrees and don't really have, you know, any kind of fixed idea
of exactly how they're approaching the process of literature or research or anything like that.
Yeah.
I mean, if you kind of look at those different concentric circles, I think certainly in the science
and evidence based bits, you've probably got people who are stopping around about 12 sets kind of
also I.
Mean I I thought the evidence based narrative was still certainly up to 20 sets per week and.
Right.
OK.
Well that wouldn't be actually very far away from the lower group in this study of 18.
So even then this study would still fall outside of that of 18 and 32 would be both expected to
cause probably fairly similar if 20 is your top end.
Yeah, I think again, it's been a while since I've sort of, you know, tried to fully understand.
You and me both.
I've got no idea what.
People.
Well, clearly I'm I know more about it than you do.
If if you thought 12 so.
Absolutely.
Well, no, I think that maybe I'm maybe I'm kind of talking about subgroups within these groups, but.
Yeah, maybe my and people are probably going to correct us if if we're wrong here, but I thought
that the general idea was it was up to 20 sets per week and then beyond that it was still more
volume equalled more growth, but that's where potentially splitting across different workouts was
important.
And then you know, obviously there's a whether Schoenfeld who did that 52 set per week study, I
think it was showing for the escalating volume over time and.
Well, no, no, no, no.
That would have been a D'souza study, surely?
I'm not sure after double check after this podcast, but whichever study it was, I think that that's
still it.
There's still a significant chunk of people, at least that I am exposed to online, that would claim
the volumes up to those very high volumes per week would still be increasing hypertrophy.
Yeah, I'm sure there's lots of little roots.
I don't know what the the actual kind of perva pervasive beliefs are there.
I mean, it's very kind of difficult for me who's shows no interest in in, in that side of things to
to kind of get a handle on.
But yeah.
So that's our first take away was the, yeah, higher volumes beyond a certain point, we're not seeing
more.
Hypertrophy, absolutely.
And then second point, there's also in the context of a within subject design, there's no apparent
disadvantage of a super high volume.
The problem is that if you understand that superspinal fatigue is a global effect, and all that's
happened is that you've suppressed both legs, not one, by doing that super high volume.
Yeah.
And then again, we failed to see stretch mediated hypertrophy in advanced lifters.
We did and then there are some small indications that there might be a muscle swelling problem such
as the pinacin angle failing to increase, which kind of expect to happen with meaningful hypertrophy
and also signs of damage increasing.
Again, just again emphasising that when people are arguing that somehow if they do lots of volume
long for long enough periods of time, they can, you know, magically get train lifters not to
experience muscle damage and it's a war.
No, that's not happening.
It's getting worse if anything.
So that's important I think.
And then just kind of getting people to think about the study design and terms of the work out
design of a short rest period and how that actually impacts on the different fatigue mechanisms that
cause you to reach muscular failure.
You know, we're hitting muscular failure at the end of each set, but how you get there is going to
differ depending on the various different fatigue mechanisms.
And what that then means in terms of the stimulus you're getting is going to vary as well.
So that's quite a bit that's, that's quite a lot that a single study is able to illuminate.
Or, you know, whether you directly touched on each of those points through what the researchers were
discussing or the, I guess the intention of the actual study, obviously they were looking for
something different.
But if you have a model you're working with, then you can actually gain quite a lot out of a single
study like that.
No, I like it.
I liked it.
I mean, it was.
It was there was lots of things I liked about it.
And I like the fact that they valued rodent studies enough to talk about them and use that as a sort
of springboard to to to launch their investigation.
I mean, to wait the way you'd hear, you know, to hear some of the evidence based crowd talk, you
know, rodent studies don't exist or you shouldn't be using them.
I mean, but you know, clearly you've got these teams who are valuing them, and I like that and
that's important.
Well, thank you everyone for joining us for another study review.
And who knows, you might be back next week with another study review.
It might happen, I'm not sure.
But either way, I hope you do join us again next week for another episode.