Episode: 048 How to do more exercises in a workout without fatigue holding you back
URL: https://open.spotify.com/episode/242nIfGoGHi4QGB9wFm5AH
Published: 2026-04-20
================================================================================

Hello everybody, Welcome back to a another episode of Hypertrophy past and present.
Thank you so much for joining us and thank you to everyone who's gonna be joining us later this week
in our first webinar for our Transcend coaching certification.
Now, before we jump into the podcast episode, we have or I have an announcement I'm going to make.
And in all the years I've done podcasts and content and all this kind of stuff, this is the first
time that I've got to do a competition announcement, winner announcement.
So this is a, a first for me.
This is kind of exciting, but we have our winner for our Transcend coaching certification
scholarship to announce.
So this was basically everyone who shared the, the image we were circulating around the
certification and they had to talk about or, or mention what their reason was for wanting to do the
certification.
And everyone submitted that and tagged us.
And today I'm announcing who the winner is, who wins the 12 month scholarship for the certification.
And it is additional pull up Philip Nova.
So FI so this is Instagram handle.
So FILIPNOVAI will also be tagging you on Insta.
So you'll be joining us for the next 12 months alongside a whole bunch of other coaches and other
athletes as we dive into 12 exciting different topics on how to program advanced programming for
what we're calling the modern clients.
So people who are dealing with all kinds of, you know, life events, stresses, dieting, injuries, gut
health issues, and you know, whether they're athletes, whether they're power lifters, whether
they're hypertrophy focused clients, all kinds of things that people are going to be dealing with
today.
So we're super planned to be starting with you guys in just a few days time.
Chris, is there anything you want to say today before I jump into a plan?
No, I'm, I think, yeah, I'm just excited to get started.
I mean, been working towards making the material as accessible, usable and practical as possible.
We've been sending a few slides backwards and forwards to capture these ideas.
Our first sessions going to be very exciting, very, very fast.
Actually.
We're going to be working through a huge amount of material to get everybody up to speed.
So those of you obviously who've been following my work for the last kind of couple of years will be
getting a very, very good refresher and hopefully a good system.
I mean, ultimately what we're going to be focusing on in this course is giving people practical
tools to use all the information that we've been sharing over the years.
So yeah, that first session's going to be very exciting for everybody, not just for people who've
been following, but also people who may be catching up a little bit.
They'll have that opportunity to get up to speed in that first session.
So very, very exciting first kind of module if you like in the course and then building on that
going forward is obviously going to be pretty cool as well.
And if you haven't signed up to join us, you can still sign up to join us for the year.
So we still are running a discount on the certification until we start our first webinar.
So that'll be on Thursday.
So I think that's the 23rd.
Yes, yes, 23rd.
Wednesday, Wednesday 23rd, I think 23rd.
So you've got a couple more days or a few more days.
If you haven't signed up, you can jump on sign up and still secure a discounted rate.
OK, that's all the housekeeping admin stuff for today.
Let's jump into a kind of silver era plan.
This is a 1960s plan, so in case you forgot, that means that anabolics were kind of being used,
though they've been introduced into bodybuilding, but only just.
So what we have here is a plan from someone named Joe Abender.
Now I suspect most of you listening probably don't know who Joe Abender was.
He was not he's not one of the most well known silver era lifters.
He's again very tail and silver era start of golden era.
But I would so put him in the the silver era category.
He didn't win any big competitions, so he sort of, you know, didn't get isn't, hasn't been
remembered as well as some of the other lifters we've talked about so far.
But he does have an an amazing physique and he's certainly a bodybuilder worth, you know, looking
into what he did and, and learning from his training methods.
Now, what we've got today is a training program that he wrote for beginner lifters.
So this was not his own plan.
This was a plan that he suggested people start on.
And I think it's a very interesting a, a well put together plan, not just for beginners, but for
honestly most people.
And last week, obviously we talked about different types of of programs, different goals.
One might have maximalist, minimalist in this kind of training for general health purposes.
And we talked, we gave some examples of what some of these well-rounded plans might look like.
And I think this plan actually fits some of those categories.
Like it's, it's a very well thought out plan.
So we'll cover that in more detail, but let me tell you what it is.
So it was it consisted of single sets.
OK, remembering that obviously, obviously single sets were kind of the more dominant system up until
late 50s, early 60s.
And he started with a leg raise.
So obviously this is, you know, a bit more of a rec fem style exercise, but he did it as a warm up
set.
So he didn't take this set to failure.
One set, 15 to 20 repetitions, leg raise.
And then he went into his squat.
Now this was done for a set of 15 to 20 repetitions.
And then he did his straight arm pullover.
So again, very silver area pairing this squat with the pullover, and that was a set of 15 as well.
And then he does a calf raise, So what he calls a toe raise here, but it's a standing calf raise and
it was done unilaterally, so one leg at a time.
And this is the only exercise he actually did 2 sets.
He did 2 sets of 20 repetitions in each leg and then went into a overhead press.
I believe he did this with a barbell, suggested doing this with a barbell, a single set of 10 to 15
repetitions into a bench press.
And this was done actually like a sort of closer grip, a shoulder width, so it wasn't very wide like
people like Ridge Park were doing at the time.
And he did this for a set of 10 to 15 and then bent over the row.
And this was more transverse plane, a set of 10 to 15.
Now we don't have any pull ups, but Chris, you'll be happy.
We do a stiff leg deadlift.
So we do some hamstring work.
And we did a, he did a set of 10 to 15 here and then a barbell curl instead of 10 to 15.
And then what he called a line triceps curl, which I guess is more like a skull crusher instead of
10 to 15.
And they concluded with some ABS.
We did sit ups, one set of 15 to 20 repetitions.
So we've got, what if we've got 246-810-1111 exercises, I believe.
And one thing that sticks out to me here, which is fairly common for the silver ear is having this
larger repetition range.
So most of these exercises were 15 to 20.
You know, obviously nowadays we see a lot of, you know, 8:00 to 10:00 or 11:50 and a lot of these
guys, you know, Steve Reeves did this as well, having these larger ranges where it might be, you
know, 8 to 12 or 10 to 15.
I think it was just an accessibility thing.
You know, if, if equipment is limited, load is limited, it allows 1A much easier opportunity to
progressively overload over time with, you know, with repetitions or with load.
So as an overall plan, what do you think of this?
So I guess they're doing this three times a week like most.
Other.
Programs.
Cool.
So yeah, I mean, it's got some interesting.
I mean, obviously it's very clearly a silver era style program.
You know, full body three times a week, same, same workout three times a week.
So full body a repeated and the excise selection.
I mean, it looks like a barbell program, doesn't it?
I mean it.
Looks, yeah, essentially.
You would literally have a barbell and that would be it.
And you could do this program so, but equally like you pointed out, while there are signs of silver
era excise selection, so like with the pullover pair with the squat, you do also see signs of kind
of more golden era type exercise as well.
So obviously the deadlift stipulate deadlift in there is kind of the obvious that kind of example.
It kind of feels like it's yeah, very late silver era in that respect.
Yeah, in terms of what it does, I think it's very, very good, except for lats.
I mean, I don't see any lat work in there at all, which is mad.
So you know, the pullover is not a lat exercise.
You know, it's a lower chest exercise with Tri such long head, the transverse plane bent over row is
most definitely not either.
So it's it's really lacking kind of lat work.
I mean, if you literally just had a frontal plane pull down or pull up in there, it would be, you
know, a lot better.
But fundamentally there's nothing wrong with the program.
It does everything very well that it does.
It just misses lat work.
And I think that's the the complaint that I would have, but that's the complaint that I always have
with Silver Air programs.
So it is and I just don't understand why they we didn't use a pull up bar more often.
Yeah, it's very strange.
It's very, very strange because they're not fundamentally that difficult to, to kind of, you know,
yeah, set up.
So, but that's where, where we are.
I mean, that's, that's just kind of what happened really.
I look at planes like this and I wonder is there anything like the fact that they all are
prioritizing all but most are prioritizing in bent over row.
Is there anything to that?
Like I'm I'm missing something in that exercise?
It's like, is there something this is doing?
I think.
It's literally because they're trying to create an exercise program that came done only with a
barbell.
I think that was the thing that sort of, if you like shifted the excise selection, it's like, can I
do the exercises that I want to with a barbell?
OK, Then those exercises I'm going to do and everything else just falls away.
And it really, this is a program that really screams that.
I think it's like you can literally do everything on this list with a barbell.
Yeah, you don't even need dumbbells.
Yeah.
Yeah, that's the issue.
And I think to be honest is is either a cultural thing or it's a marketing thing or it's just a
fundamental, you know, equipment availability thing.
But that's that's the vibe I'm getting from this programme.
It's like if you can't do it with a Barber, it's not getting in, and that's why I think you end up
with substandard exercises like bent over rose, which is just horrible really.
Which, to be fair, is really the only exercise here.
I mean, obviously the pullover, we can argue about what that's doing, but.
In that, in the context of this program, because the bench press variation is very narrow grip, then
pullover makes sense because he's basically just splitting chest workout to exercises.
If you've done a wide grip bench then I'd be like just take the pullover out, it's pointless.
Yeah, yeah.
Unless perhaps, you know, if you were doing a wide grip bench and you had someone who was naturally
more Trisys dominant anyway, then arguably you might be getting suddenly more out of that pullover
potentially.
But this is definitely the best way to pair that.
It's it is interesting when you see people modify, and I think we've talked about this in an episode
in the past where you can modify the multi joint, like the pressing exercise, and you can push it
really far down one way or the other to then pair that with an exercise which is achieving the
opposite.
So this is a good example of that where you're doing the closest grip bench, perfect pairing with
the pullover.
I like looking at this and and obviously, like you've mentioned, he's done this probably because
it's a barbell focus plan.
But these are really bang for buck exercises and especially, I guess for beginners or someone who,
you know, doesn't want to be doing 400 different exercises, I mean, 11 exercises, A lot of people
today would say, oh, that's too many.
But you know, he's got an overhead press in there, obviously getting middle delts, getting front
delts, He's got the bench press in there.
You know, these are these are very bang for buck, you know, get some triceps, get some chest, get
some delts.
And you look at this and there's so many, so many I ideologies today that this would challenge, you
know, the idea that, you know, you're doing more than 10 different exercises already.
People going to say you can't do that.
You know, the idea that he's doing an overhead press with a bench press.
You know, there's going to be people saying you can't do that.
And it's like, well, actually, this is a really efficient plan, especially for someone who's only
got access to a barbell.
You know, I would look at plan like this and think, you know, why?
If I had someone who you know, they, they didn't want to get on stage, they just wanted to build
kind of as much mass as they can with his little work as possible.
But the lat exercise, this is pretty much it.
Yeah, I mean, and you, you know, you can make use of modern equipment and you can be in and out and
the gym even more quickly.
I mean, you replace your squat squats with, I mean you replace your squats with, with, with, with,
with a leg press or a machine hand squat, Yeah.
Or, you know, pendulum square or whatever.
And you you, you're loading time and your warm up time is going to decrease massively.
Massively.
Do the same thing with your bench press and your overhead press and use machines.
You take out the pullover and the bent over row and place them with lat pull down and narrow grip
machine row and you're going to be out of the gym in 45 minutes.
I mean, it's not going to take you forever to do that and you're going to cover, you know, as you
said, somebody who's not going to get on stage is going to cover all their bases and have a very,
very usable routine.
I think this is, this is what we just keep saying, that these silver era programmes are the
template, which if you just add a little bit of modern technology, such as technology, a little bit
of modern engineering, and suddenly you've got an amazing program that's better than 99.9% of
anything you're going to find online.
It's really, really kind of very, very good template with, as I say, the only reason why I think it
lacks is because it was being forced to fit with a barbell only.
That's my view.
When I look at that, that's what that tells me.
Yeah, yeah.
And I always objected this being called a beginner plan because it's like, it's not.
Yeah, it's it's like I said a moment ago, it's a plan for anyone basically who doesn't want to get
on stage, you know that you don't need to progress of this, You know, this could well and truly
achieve the goal that many people would have and you could stay on this plan.
You know, it doesn't this is not a plan you can only do for six months or for one year or whatever.
You know, this is a perfectly adequate plan to do long term and just.
And just stop for a moment and think about what you just said and compare it with what we get
bombarded with on social media with ideas that we need to be doing like drop sets and other advanced
techniques and pre exhaustion, this, that and the next.
And everyone's wanting to do something super complicated.
They're wanting to like pair exercises up and oh, and now I need to do a priming exercise and I need
to do.
And like all of that is rubbish.
You know, when they're not doing something fundamentally correct, like this type of programme where
they're doing a solid training frequency with some really good exercise selection that covers all
their bases and ultimately is going to allow them to make progress for a very long period of time
and build on a solid foundation and just keep going.
And yet we're being told that, Oh yeah, you know, you need to do sort of these complicated things
that are like physiologically nonsensical, but that that's where the industry has gone.
It's absolutely mad when you compare this simplistic routine, which is going to get a lot of people,
as you say, pretty much all the way to their to their goals.
As long as they're not being ambitious enough to get on stage, they're going to get a very long way
with this.
And yet it's very, very starkly contrasting with what we see on social media all the time.
I think it's very, very important to create sort of make people aware of that juxtaposition.
It's very, very stark contrast.
Yeah, it's, it's, it's not at all like a plan you would see today.
You know, anyone who's writing a plan like this is writing it because, I mean, they know he's
listening to us or yeah, or, you know, they've seen sort of how silver area people have have lifted
and they've been inspired by that, you know, like I I well.
Maybe they themselves have have have have figured out the anabolics have completely, yes, you know,
kind of skewed everybody's perception of how strength training actually works.
And maybe they've figured that out themselves just by observation.
But they've extracted themselves from the groupthink of, well, you need 52 sets, you know, per
muscle, per week, whatever, to be able to write a plan like this.
Yeah.
So where are we going with this episode?
Where are we only going to talk about next?
It's a little bit relevant to what we've just said there.
Yeah.
So what I'd like to talk about today is something that I've mentioned a number of times before, and
ultimately it comes back to a misunderstanding of how fatigue actually works.
Now, obviously I've talked through the various mechanisms of fatigue.
I've talked through the definitions of fatigue, and a lot of this flies over people's heads, I
think, a lot of time.
So very, very kind of briefly, let me just encapsulate what I'm talking about when I say fatigue.
Fatigue is an actual outcome that we can measure.
It's an observable reduction in excise performance.
So you can have a scenario where you do a strength training set and maybe because of the way that
you do it or the rest period that you take afterwards, when you actually then test to see if you are
fatigued, you don't actually notice any changes in performance.
So for example, a very, very simple example might be I do sort of five reps of a chest press.
Maybe I leave a Rep in reserve and then I rest for a couple of minutes and then I test my strength
again and maybe I get the exact same number of reps out again with the same number of reps in
reserve.
And so technically, at that point, I'm not fatigued.
Now you could say to me, oh, yeah.
But do you feel fatigued?
Do you feel tired?
Yeah, I can feel the fact that the exercise, but it's not fatigue because I am displaying the exact
same exercise performance as I did a couple of minutes ago.
Now you can get the same thing with shorter rest periods, you get the same thing.
It doesn't really matter.
The point is that if I don't objectively measure a change in performance, then exercise science
definition of fatigue tells me that I'm not fatigued.
So however, I feel whatever mechanisms are happening under the surface.
So that's an important observation.
I could have fatigue mechanisms present, but I could also have fatiguation mechanisms present.
I could equal those out and technically on paper, I am not fatigue because fatigue requires me to
display an objective reduction in exercise performance.
So that's really, really the important starting point.
That's an important point.
Let's just say that once more in case someone missed it.
So you're saying there can actually be fatigue mechanisms that have taken place.
And so in the absence of anything else, you would be fatigued, but because it's also a potentiation
effect which could be taking place.
So basically a performance boosting effect, it's balance itself out.
And so now your performance hasn't gone down.
And so technically speaking, you're not you're not fatigued because fatigue in this sense is based
on performance going down.
Correct.
So we've always got to be aware that these these two totally separate but obviously interacting
concepts.
There is the fatigue objective external measurement which is has my performance changed And then
under the surface there's N fatigue mechanisms.
So just coming a little bit more detail on these, if I have a potentiation effect, then almost all
potentiation effects are located inside muscle fibres.
You can have potentiation mechanisms that exist in the central nervous system, but they're
relatively minimal in most kind of situations that we find ourselves in.
So most of the time if you're doing a gym sort of strength training set and you experience a
potentiation mechanism, it's going to be peripheral, it's not going to be central.
So.
Do you see motivation that doesn't count as a potentiation or it doesn't?
Clarification, clarification.
Then the only potential, the only SO potentiation is the exact opposite of fatigue, definition wise.
So if I give the full definition of fatigue, the definition of fatigue is a temporary and reversible
reduction in excise performance as a result of a previous bout of exercise.
OK, so that's the full definition.
Now a lot of the time you see truncated versions of this definition, so people forget this.
They sort of change exercise points to be strength.
Now, most of the time those truncations or or changes aren't fundamentally problematic, but if you
really want to get to the absolute depths of what we mean by fatigue, you have to have the full
definition.
Now when you flip that over and say potentiation is literally just the opposite of fatigue, and you
have a temporary and reversible increase in exercise performance as a result of a previous bout of
exercise.
And now you can see that if I'm motivated by somebody shouting encouraging words at me, that isn't a
potentiating effect because it wasn't caused by a previous bout of exercise.
So This is why definitions are important.
We actually have to know exactly what it is that we mean when we're saying these different things.
So potentiation actually excludes the possibility of a motivation.
Also any other psychological impact.
So if I'm using a focus of attention, or if somebody motivates me, or if, you know, there's music
playing in the background, I get excited.
Whatever.
It doesn't apply as a potentiation mechanism.
It will change whether or not I can record a definition of fatigue present or not.
Because like for example, if I do my chest press bout of sort of five repetitions or whatever, and
then I come back a couple of minutes later and I do it again, but this time I've got somebody
standing next to me being encouraging and I get my repetitions I got previously.
But in the presence of motivation, then yeah, again, I'm not fatigued.
But it's because I've had a small amount of fatigue mechanism present, but combined with the
motivating effect, I've then brought myself back up to 0 zero.
And so I've ended up in a 0 fatigue situation.
The issue is that if I went above that and displayed an improvement in performance, I couldn't call
that potentiation.
In this particular instance because I've inserted the motivational technique which has created the
positive effect without actually using a potentiation effect.
The potentiation effect has to come exclusively from an exercise bow in order to be defined as
potentiation.
So again, you've got these different things moving in different directions.
But if I insert a genuinely do non exercise intervention then I can't call that potentiation.
I'm obviously going to see a like improvement in performance, but then in that situation, it's not
actually potentiation in the same way.
Much less commonly you could have somebody demotivate you.
So you could see a reduction in performance and you look at that and go technically am I fatigued or
have I just been demotivated?
Now, again, in the research, you will see confusion over this and some people will not notice that
that is actually not a fatigue instance.
Even though I've reduced exercise performance, technically I'm not doing it because of fatigue and
therefore it's not actually technically fatigue, but we generally do include that fatigue.
So for example, trying to think of a trying to think of a, a suitable some kind of incidents where
this would happen.
But yeah, I mean, if you here's a good one, if you remove somebody's autonomy.
So if you, if you have a situation where somebody's doing a strength training workout and they and
they, they, their autonomy is taken away from them.
So instead of their them being able to do the way that the workout, the way that they want to do it
or in the order or the time that they want to do it in you take away the autonomy you will see a
demotivating effect.
So a very usable experimental design for this.
So I get lots of requests.
Incidentally, I get a lot of requests regarding people wanted to do like set up their master's
thesis and they asking me to study designs or even sometimes PhD thesis.
They'll say to me, how can I construct a PhD thesis around the ideas that you're talking about?
Well, here's a really interesting 1.
You could do a standard autonomy removal design that now in motor learning they do this all the
time.
So you can just look at a motor learning study design if you want a better version than one I'm
giving you now.
But basically with autonomy removal, on the one hand, you have one group of people who are basically
told to go in the gym and follow a specific workout plan.
Now it could be the workout plan that you've just talked through.
It could be something as simple as that, or it could be user more, use more, more user friendly.
You would have a machine based program where you can do like, you know, simple warm up sets and then
do the main set without any difficulty.
You would have one group, Group A, which is the control group, and they would be told to go in the
gym and do the exercise with the warm up sets.
They'll be told to do say 2 warm up sets followed by three warm sets, followed by their work set.
And they would know what those weights were before they went in.
Everybody would know what their actual work rate was before they went into the worker.
So they'd be told pick whatever warm up sets you want and then do your, your work set, which is the
number of the weight you've been told to failure.
And we will basically record the number of reps to failure that you get.
And you know, you could tell them to take 3 minutes recipe or whatever, or you could let them rest
as long as they want.
It doesn't really matter.
Group B would basically be what we call tied to a member of Group A.
So essentially every Group A member would have a Group B member and they would follow them around
and Group B would literally do whatever Group A did except when they got to work.
So they would have to train to failure so that whenever Group A member did their warm up set and
they did say 3 reps with whatever, Group B would literally have to just mimic whatever they did.
And what you would find is that Group B would display a reduction in excise performance in terms of
the number of reps to failure they were getting because of the removal of that autonomy that they're
experiencing in the context of that workout.
Now technically, you could say that that was fatigue.
And it's not actually true because it's not a reduction in exercise performance created by a
previous bout of exercise.
It's created by a demotivation effect from, I mean, your autonomy removed.
So this is getting really, really deep into the definitions of what we're actually working with and
concepts behind what we're talking about because, but really what we're trying to get at when we
say, am I experiencing fatigue is have I experienced A reduction exercise points because of an
exercise phenomenon preceded?
If I experience an exercise, if I experience a reduction in performance because I'm stressed,
unhappy, demotivated, cognitively, kind of sort of focused on something different.
Like when we give people a Stroop test and then ask them to do a strength training set, they
generally experience reduction in performance.
We call that a kind of mental fatigue because we're trying to get it the exercise performance
reduction that's been created by something that's not actually exercise.
We shouldn't really call it fatigue.
I mean, it is functioning as a supraspinal CNS fatigue mechanism, but the actual output isn't
technically fatigue.
It's reduction exercise, which is, looks like fatigue, but it's not actually technically fatigue.
But we tend to wrap it up as fatigue because we just kind of, you know, want to, you know,
incorporate this additional CNST mechanism into that kind of scenario.
And it, the terminology isn't perfect, But ultimately what we're dealing with here is fatigue and
potentiation, which are excise induced and then other stuff around the edges which can create
fatigue mechanisms, which technically isn't really a fatigue or a potentiation effect, but we tend
to often describe them as such.
So these are all kind of kind of related concepts, but problems in, in, in, in terms of the
terminology, simply because of the way that the field has developed over time.
And we've tried to tighten up definitions, but by doing so, we've excluded certain physiological
concepts which are related to those phenomena.
Does that all make sense?
It does.
Certainly.
I I had a feeling anticipating where this conversation is going to go.
I think that that distinction you've drawn there over motivation and fatigue is going to be really
important.
And just hearing you talk about that, it's made me come to the realization that I actually think
majority of the time online when people are talking about fatigue, at least in the context of within
a single session fatigue, I actually think majority of the time, not all, but but probably 50% or a
bit more, they're referring to motivation.
I don't think they're referring to fatigue and they don't know it.
Yes, but there is that connection because like we've talked about in the past, a lot of the time
motivation reduces when people stop looking at the stop focusing their attention on the goal that
they're trying to achieve and start focusing their attention on the fact that they feel
uncomfortable.
And that as a result, because those uncomfortable sensations are coming from exercise themselves,
that technically does to all into the superspinal CSD category as an exercise relativity mechanism.
So if I if I create discomforting sensations as a result of several bouts of intense exercise, that
switches my focus away from thinking I'm in the gym trying to achieve my body composition goal or my
strength goal, whatever.
And I start thinking about the fact that I'd be much more comfortable sat on the sofa with a cup of
tea.
So if you had two people, I know they're getting a little bit ahead of ourselves here, but let's
see, I had two people in that situation outline there where they both experiencing the same
discomforting sensations in that workout.
And one of them is, is thinking to themselves basically, I, I hate this, this sort of this workout.
I hate these long workouts.
I hate doing this many exercises.
Exactly.
Exactly.
Exactly, exactly.
The other person's not the other person's thinking, OK, I'm feeling this discomfort, that's fine.
But I, I know how valuable what I'm doing here is.
And then not letting that demotivate them.
Exactly that first person is that fatigue or not?
Well, what you're describing is, what you're describing is a set of thought processes which is
either amplifying or minimizing the negative effect that those fatigue induced sensations can have
or exercise induced sensations can have.
So the exercise creates the sensations and then the brain interprets that information and decides, I
mean, ultimately what you're describing here is the psychology of elite performance because it all
comes down to attentional switching.
Am I am I focusing all the time on what I'm trying to do or am I allowing my attention to get pulled
away towards being more?
Ultimately a lot of life is literally about deciding whether to be focused on what you want to do
and being uncomfortable and doing that, or allowing yourself to get distracted and and saying well
actually I'd be more comfortable if I just sat and had a cup of tea instead.
I mean a lot of life comes back to that but especially in exercise situation because the exercise
itself is creating those uncomfortable sensations.
If they weren't there then you wouldn't have the task.
Quit switching or the focus switching problem.
So all the brain is doing is either amplifying or minimizing the impact that those sensations have.
So yeah, I mean you are introducing an extra element, but it's part of the way your body is
processing that information.
So information is still coming from the exercise itself.
So I would still argue that that still is a fatigue related phenomenon.
But you're absolutely right.
And the motivational kind of processing or the circuits related to motivation that we're talking
about are absolutely.
More or less fatiguing.
Either making or less fatigue.
Totally 100.
Percent, I mean, if someone's listening to this and they're like, oh, you know, well, I don't, I
don't know if I sort of believe that around like, you know, the motivation side of things.
I mean, I can certainly say that I know first hand for me personally where I've seen the biggest
reductions in my performance in the gym have not been for me doing like higher volumes in a session,
you know, maybe doing a few extra sets or whatever.
It's been for me getting a message on my phone about some, you know, work related issue I need to go
deal with or, you know, some in, you know, interpersonal issue I've had with a friend or or
whatever.
You know, they're the times when my my session has become a bad session and suddenly I'm hitting,
I'm, I'm weak on every single one of my lips.
I'm I'm hitting weight.
So I would, you know, always easily be able to hit and now it's a Max effort.
It's not because I've done an extra set.
And that's that's why we've got really nice data showing that as soon as you let people use their
smartphones in the context of experimental workout, you just ask one group of people to leave their
smartphones, you know, outside in the locker and the other group of people take them with them and
scroll.
And immediately you see the difference.
People are scrolling getting way worse kind of exercise points.
It's because your brain is processing information and not devoting that processing power to the
actual exercise that you're doing.
So you're withdrawing resources that you can use in the context of producing motor unit recruitment.
And as a result, you, you just, you experience that reduction in performance.
So what what I'm not saying is that the definitions of fatigue and potentiation and the rest of it
are perfect.
They're not.
There's definitely little ray areas here and there where you kind of have to say, you know, is this
genuinely coming from excise or is this me processing the information and the way that I'm
processing it?
Or is it actually information coming from elsewhere like with smartphone, is that really fatigue?
I mean, yeah, it worked perfectly through the superspinal CST mechanism because I'm literally just
reducing either my motivation directly and that reduces my maximum tolerable protection of it, or
I'm chewing up resources and therefore creating a discomfort that is contributing to my effort
perception and therefore bringing me closer to my maximum total perception effort.
So you can do it in two ways.
And it works perfectly through the superspinal CFD mechanism that we already know about.
But technically it's not coming from a source that is exercise related in active instance.
So yeah, I guess what I'm saying is you have to be a little bit tolerant of the problems associated
with exercise terminology, but be aware of them so that you can't know what concepts you're talking
about.
This goes back to what we've been saying before, which is that if you allow the definitions of words
to drive your understanding of how the Physiology works, you're going to get into trouble.
You're going to end up doing what a lot of the evidence based guys do and getting lost in what words
really mean and what concepts really mean.
What we're trying to do in from a science based perspective is say what is actually happening and
then be aware that that may not map perfectly to the words that we're using.
I mean, obviously we try and be precise about definitions, but being aware that sometimes there's
going to be little grey areas where your definitions get like messed around with a bit.
But where I'm where I want to go with this today is to talk about what we what we mean when we talk
about fatigue during a workout, what we mean when we talk about fatigue after a workout.
And what that actually means in terms of practicalities for programming strength training workouts
specifically in the context of doing larger numbers of exercises per workout.
So that's where I want to go.
So all of that preamble was me just kind of hopefully not confusing people too much, but just making
them aware of the fact that we do have a relatively good terminology I would say.
But there are weaknesses in terms of being very precise about the specifics of interactions between
things like mental kind of concentration, task switching or focus switching and the results of that
in terms of measuring fatigue or potentiation in context of strength training worker.
So if we kind of take a single strength training workout and say, OK, we're going to do a number of
exercises in that workout, then as you pointed out, as soon as we start listing large numbers of
exercises, like more than say 12131415 exercises, a lot of people immediately have two objections.
And this is where I want to kind of focus the rest of today's conversation.
Firstly, one group of people will say, oh, well, you can't do that number of exercises in a single
workout.
By the time you get to the end, the exercises you're doing at the end will be pointless.
OK, that's one group, people.
So what they're saying is that the accumulation of fatigue as you go through the session will create
a problem for you, and that by the time you get to the end, you'll be experiencing so much.
You know, again, I'm trying to kind of capture the essence.
Of their objective.
Without, without.
But I don't like One of my personal kind of dislikes about the way people kind of talk to each other
online is that a lot of people will go straight in at the beginning and create a straw man or a
pejorative version of what their opponent is saying because they want to win the argument really
quickly and move on.
And I think straight away that just completely turns the argument into an emotional one rather than
a cognitive 1.
So I'm trying to keep this cognitive.
So yeah, basically their argument is that your whatever is happening in the earlier parts of the
workout has created a negative effect so that you end up with a reduced stimulus from the excises at
the end of the workout.
OK, cool.
So that's one complaint that we see.
Incidentally, there are actually other people who say the excise order effect doesn't exist.
So it's not like I'm kind of taking an extreme position here.
The other group of people then will say, well, if you're doing all those exercises in a single
session, then you're not going to recover in time for your next workout.
And that's a separate set of complaints.
So I just want to look at those two kind of complaints and just go through them.
And I think some people even combine them and those are the people I kind of lose respect for
because as we'll get into it, their mechanisms are different.
But fundamentally what these two sets of complaints we're going to talk about, you know, doing a lot
of exercises, how does that create a problem for intra work appetite?
And then doing a lot of exercises, is that going to create a problem for post work appetite?
Is that kind of making sense as a framework?
Absolutely.
And you know, we've talked about so many plans on these podcasts of silver area lifters before
anabolics and now we're doing 10121520.
We've talked about something going up to 30, even 40 exercises in a single session.
And you know, this week I, I posted on my social media about this idea that what you've just said
there that you can't do more than 10 exercises in a session.
And like, well, really, every single person before anabolics was doing just that.
And lo and behold, obviously I had people in my comment section say either, no, no, no, you can't
possibly do that because as you said there, you get to the end, you're not getting any stimulus in
those last year exercises or the other one is now your CNS will be Friday if you do that for a
couple of sessions.
So there's, it is funny that there's these objections and people know that you can't do it.
They don't agree on why.
Yeah, absolutely.
And so before I jump in, I just want to clarify that that does not mean that I'm telling people that
they have to do or must do or are, you know, kind of going to be best placed doing lots of exercises
in every session.
I personally don't do that many exercises in every single session.
If I want to include more exercise variety, I simply use a, B, A/B, A/B format.
So I split my kind of number of exercises across 2 sessions and then I do a three day a week
protocol.
And that kind of moved me forward across multiple exercises.
That's how I get my exercise variety.
I'm an old man.
Your mileage very.
So that's just kind of how I govern things.
I'm not suggesting that this is the only way of training.
I'm just, we're just arguing about or explaining how the fatigue actually works so that, you know,
when people are kind of making statements about how they think these programming decisions are
affecting the resulting hypertrophy or whatever, and we're explaining why those positions are not
necessarily accurate.
So basically if we're doing a full body workout and we're aiming to cover, you know, substantially
different parts of the body with every single exercise.
So let's, you know, let's start with that assumption.
We're we're starting with the assumption we're not overlapping that much between exercises.
So we're picking exercises that are perhaps slightly lower in total muscle mass in order to get a
large number of exercises, say 15 without covering, you know, kind of multiple muscles, sorry, same
muscle multiple times.
So it's similar to our our Maximus plan last week, but perhaps a little bit on the lighter end of
it.
So maybe the, you know, the one or two exercises per muscle there.
Yeah.
So sort of that kind of trajectory.
So, so basically in that scenario, you're not really going to be having overlapping peripheral
fatigue mechanisms that much.
You're really only going to be having overlapping central nervous system fatigue mechanisms.
And it's basically going to happen because of what the cardiovascular system is doing.
So ultimately when you do a exercise, whenever you do a cytomuscular contractions, you're going to
have a couple of things happening.
You're going to have basically a cardiovascular response.
So you're going to have a sympathetic nervous system activity increase.
Your heart rate's going to go up, your breathing rate's going to go up, and those are going to come
with discomforting sensations.
And those discomforting sensations are going to contribute to an increase in your effort perception,
which is going to bring you close to the maximum tolerable perception effort.
So if you do another strength training set while those things are still in place, critical
statement, then you will find that you can't do as many reps on the next exercise, even if it's a
completely different muscle group.
So if you literally do like an overhead press and then immediately try and do biceps kills, you will
not get your maximum number of biceps kills out if you do it too close after finishing your overhead
press set.
So that's literally just because of the discomforting sensations bringing you close to the maximum
tolerable perception of effort.
We also have inflammation that gets produced, myokines that get produced in the muscles, they leak
into the bloodstream.
Every time we do muscular contractions, they leak into the bloodstream.
They will then circulate and they will create again, fatiguing feelings in the brain.
I'm not using fatigue in a technical sense.
They're just referring to the kind of discomforting sensations, discomforting sensation in the
brain, which again bring you close to your maximum tolerable perception of effort.
As we talked about earlier, you've also got this kind of motivational factor where as you go through
the workout and your brain is starting to focus more and more and more on that cup of tea that you
can have on your sofa when you get back home instead of what you're doing in the gym right there.
And then you can start to magnify these negative effects and push them in a direction which takes
them in an even more super spinal CNST causing effect rather than, you know, kind of being more able
to achieve high levels of central motor command.
So all of that stuff really is the is the sort of fatigue mechanisms that are happening as we
progress through the strength train workout.
So is all of that making sense?
Yes.
Cool.
So what that means then is that our excise selection, our rest period selection, our choices around
training variables like repetition range and proximity to failure, all of that is going to modify
how that those things are happening.
So if for example, I choose large muscle mass exercises straight away, I'm going to have huge dumps
of lactate into my bloodstream.
I'm going to have a very large cardiovascular sensation effect.
I'm going to have a lot large inflammation effect.
I'm going to be experiencing a lot of negative sensations relatively quickly.
And especially now this is interesting, especially if I now pair that with more multi joint
exercises later on in the workout.
If you do a couple of multi joint exercises and then your brain can tell like you're so it just
knows you've got more of those coming up straight away.
Now your attentional focus is going to get pulled more and more and more towards the sofa and the
cup of tea and further and further away from the exercises that you're about to do.
So it's not just about the kind of exercise that you've done, it's also about what you've got left.
So this this is kind of like I've mentioned this before where we've talked about if you normally do
three sets of seated leg curls, and then I ask you to just for one week go in and only do a single
set.
I guarantee you will absolutely beat your first set numbers with that set protocol because you know
that you haven't got the other two to come straight after it.
And the same thing is going to happen here.
Your brain is going to start getting pulled away from the actual focus of what you're trying to
achieve and more and more and more towards sitting on the sofa.
And as a result, it starts to dial back the amount of effort that you're prepared to tolerate in
those latest sets of the workouts.
So this is more subtle than just saying, OK, I've done some.
I mean, I know I generally just describe it as like, whatever you've done previously is going to
affect whatever comes next.
But it's more subtle than that because your brain doesn't know what you've actually got to do as a
whole session.
So that entire compute is taking place in the background while you're doing any given exercise in
that series.
So starting point, then exercise selection.
If you're doing large muscle mass exercises, we're going to experience a bigger problem because you
can have more lactate in the system.
If you're taking shorter rest periods straight away, we're going to start accumulating a problem
that's getting bigger and bigger and bigger.
As you go through a workout, you're going to experience more and more accumulation of lactate in the
background, and that is then going to create a more and more negative effect on the later sets of
the workout.
The point you made there with those ex, like multiple multi joint exercises.
So that's something that I think a lot about when I program.
And I think that there's some really interesting ways to look at that Because so I actually had an
ex did an experiment where I went back and looked at all the silver area plans I could find.
And I've tried to look at where they were programming squats and about 2/3 of the time they were
programming them in the last couple of exercises.
And then sometimes they programmed them at the start.
And I actually think that when it comes to programming multi joints, if you have it either at the
start, you get it out of the way and then it goes the rest of the workout and you can focus or you
have it right at the end.
And you know, I do that one sort of squats and I'm out.
Of here I crawl out of the gym exactly yes I.
I think they're the most motivating places.
Psychologic exercises.
Psychologically important locations.
Yeah, yeah.
So I think there's a lot actually to be said and it doesn't mean 1 is better than the other.
I personally, the way I do it is if I'm doing squats or programming squats that are fewer than say 6
repetitions, I put them at the start because then that cardiovascular burden is not going to
subtract as much.
If I'm doing more, you know, 8/10/12 repetitions, I'll put at the end because I'm not just concerned
about that motivational piece you talked about.
I'm now concerned about that cardiovascular component as well.
Yeah.
Exactly.
Exactly.
Yeah.
And so things like proximity to failure and Rep ranges are also going to play a role.
So again, we're picking large muscle mass exercises and we're combining that with short risk periods
and high reps and you know, kind of training to failure straight away.
You are magnifying that exercise order effect.
In contrast, if you're sticking with slightly less muscle mass exercises, I mean even slightly, I
mean just going from squat to leg press is going to make a difference.
If you kind of bring their atom muscle mass down a notch and then you use like slightly heavier Rep
range, leave a Rep and reserve, give a slightly longer rest period.
And suddenly that exercise order effect as we would say that that negative impact of what you've
done previously is going to get smaller and smaller and smaller very, very quickly.
And so ultimately, I think a lot of the people who are saying, Oh no, no, you can't possibly do you
know, kind of 50 exercises in a session.
I think a lot of those people are training predominantly with multi multi joint exercises.
They're using high repetition ranges, like sort of 10 to 12.
They're trained to failure with every single set.
They're leaving short rest periods and they're ending up, yeah, you're going to be in a mess by the
time you get halfway through.
Absolutely.
And then you're going to be miserable and your brain is going to be dragged towards the sofa and the
cup of tea and you're not going to want to actually continue with the workout that you're doing.
Whereas in contrast, stick with machines and do the exact opposite.
You kind of keep the muscle mass a bit low, leave along the rest period, Rep and reserve, you know,
kind of sensible heavy kind of loading and straight away suddenly we've got that capacity to do a
little bit more.
I think that's the important thing when we're talking about intra workout fatigue is that a lot of
people's lived experience of doing lots of exercises is that it is a miserable experience.
If you train in that way, you know, whereas you start to move the dial in the direction of more
tolerable excise choices and training variables choices, then it becomes much more workable.
I mean, you simply need to do compare two different exercises and and if you want to look at the
extremes through two different muscles, but you can't even do it for the same muscle.
But if you were to compare, say you know, instead of 10 or 12 repetitions of a squat done to failure
or 0 reps in reserve compared to you could do either leg extension or even if you want an extreme
example, do something like a biceps curl, you might do a set of five.
Just note for yourself how long does it take you to get back to your baseline after that?
And in terms of feeling, literally work a feeling in this regard is fine.
And just say, when do you feel like you're back to normal?
And for me with a set of 12 squats and I'm I'm kind of vascular, I'm pretty fit.
If I were to do a set of 12 squats to failure, it's probably going to be about 10 minutes before I'm
not not noticing.
Surprise when they when they do that and they they, because they've been conditioned to believe that
3 or 4 minutes.
I mean, like the idea that 3 minutes rest is like the gold standard.
Everybody just repeats that.
Look at fitness influences, even in like evidence based and science based communities, they've just
got 3 minutes because that's the number that you keep seeing.
But the reality is physiologically that makes no sense because if you still feel horrible, then
you've got a super final fatigue effect.
And yeah, I, I was when you, when you came out with 10, I was like, OK, yeah, OK, you're a big guy.
But like for me it's about 7:00 and like for that kind of situation and that's solid 7 minutes.
I would need really to get myself ready to do another set and have a, you know, I would lose reps,
but you know, sort of getting approaching a equivalent level of performance.
Well, I literally tested it this week.
I did.
I think I did maybe a set of it was a little bit higher reps I did a set of 16 to failure on the hat
score.
Yeah.
And 10 minutes later I was literally sitting there doing nothing for 10 minutes. 10 minutes later,
my breast rate and my heart rate was still elevated.
Yeah, yeah, yeah, it's, it's really mad.
And this is and, and just to kind of out on top of all of the things we've already said, because
since we're talking about squats, I think it's important that there are also exercise selection
choices which require a lot more warm ups than others.
Yes.
Squat's a classic example.
You can't just walk up to the bar and start doing squats.
So you just, just, it's not possible.
You're going to need to spend probably 10 plus minutes getting to the point where you're happy with
your squat to the degree that you're going to do that string 20 set.
This is why powerlifting actually follows completely different rules when we're talking about kind
of the way workouts are laid out because you don't need, well, like 20 minutes to get to the point
where you're going to do your, your sound squats.
But in context of bodybuilding, even then you still got to be at warm up lead time.
So again, you start taking those exercises out of the program and suddenly it starts being
manageable.
And I think again, people who are kind of having this knee jerk reaction of saying, oh, no, you
can't do 15 exercises in the session.
If you look at what they're doing, they're probably doing freeway squats in the garage.
I mean, and I'm not people do that because I'd lived that.
So you know, I'm, I'm, that is my experience as well.
If you told me when I was doing freeway back squats in my garage that I had to do 15 exercises, I
would have actually laughed.
Yeah.
I think using that example again, if you say you wanted to do 15 different exercises and you want to
program squads, I was working straight in my head.
How would I do it?
Well, would I be doing a single set of 12?
So then I need to do only maybe one or two warm up sets.
Well, that's probably the most efficient way of doing it.
But then like I just said, I'm going to be stuck waiting for 8 minutes or something so.
You're going to up to the end of your session.
So I finished up first.
Yeah, exactly.
But then how many other exercises like that?
Kind of what if I want to do a stiff leg or want to do a rack pull or want to do pull ups, Chain
pull ups?
OK, maybe you don't need to do as many warm up sets, but a stiff leg crack pull or something like
that?
Absolutely.
You're gonna need to do just as many warm up sets as you squat.
And what am I gonna do?
15 repetitions.
I'm gonna be stuck waiting 8 minutes again.
So you need to decide, do I do lower repetitions?
But then I need to do four or five warm up sets to get there.
It really becomes a juggling act, doesn't it?
It does.
But again the excise selection I think is the thing that takes precedence because if you've got a
well equipped machine based gym then it really even with that, even with heavier loads you can get
away with a very, very small number of warm up sets, warm up reps.
So I mean I can work in five to seven Rep ranges and literally do 2 warm up reps.
Yeah, yeah.
I mean, even on a hat squad, I love hat squads because I can go heavy on a hat squad.
Do you know sets of five and I'll normally do like 2 warm up sets to get there.
Yeah.
So again, the machines are what make the difference.
Now, I think ultimately you, you can kind of, you have to kind of sort of see different limitations
on.
But again, just before I kind of express that point again, it comes back to what your personal
circumstances are and what capacity you've got to do the kind of what time you've got to do the
workout and what other things you've got to do.
Like if you can behave like an old school lifter and like, you know, literally, you know, sit down
in a deck chair and have a have a drink of orange juice for 10 minutes between lifts, then actually
you can probably do a lot more than somebody who's like on the clock and they've got to be out in,
you know, sort of 50 minutes because they've got somewhere else to be.
I think ultimately those time constraints are probably what drive the number of exercises more than
anything.
But if you can get to a machine kind of, well, I could machine based gym and you can make that work
for you.
And I think you can push the number of exercises up to a quite a high level.
You'd probably get to 20 and still be out of the gym within, you know, kind of a reasonable amount
of time.
You're not spending, you know, hours and hours and hours in there.
But again, people who can spend hours and hours and hours in there because they're students or
they've got, you know, kind of business that runs itself, whatever, then sure.
I mean, like they can probably have a number of other options open to them.
Like they can probably do the free weight back squat if they want to do that and then just spend 10
minutes looking out the window and then carry on with the rest of their workout.
I mean, it's important that we identify where limitations are being created because they're
practical or life related.
And it's like, because when somebody says to me, no, you can't do that, I'm like, yeah, but are you
saying that it's impossible or are you saying physiologically or are you saying that just in the
context of modern life that is highly impractical and improbable?
OK.
They do different things, you know, so.
Because if you were to do 15 exercises, wait 8 minutes between each exercise, do a set of eight,
then there's there should be basically not none of that cardiovascular respiratory rate sort of
increases in and you know, the Afrin feedback, which would be affecting how your perception of
effort in the next exercise.
Ultimately what is going to be affecting you there is going to be the inflammation the my kind you
were talking about before.
So then the question is how fatiguing really is that going to be and do we do we have a way of?
Well, it seems, it seems to be related to exercise duration, intensity and muscle mass used.
So if you kind of, yeah, I mean if you kind of go in and start hammering out sets of 10/12, you
know, to failure on the back squat, then you're just going to catch up with you pretty quickly.
You know, Whereas if you're doing like more of a machine based muscle by muscle approach, then I
think it's probably going to be a lot less of an effect.
Because this less musculature being used.
Musculature being used ultimately.
So you're going to get a much smaller kind of kind of dump of those myokines into the bloodstream.
Same way that lactate works really.
So I think really again, it's, it's just all all related to the same underlying phenomenon which is
affected by the same exercise selection variables and the same, you know kind of training variables
as well.
So ultimately it's all just about managing that cardiovascular, those cardiovascular processes.
As you said, we can and we, as we've talked about, we can manipulate those training variables in
various different ways, but the exact number of exercises is therefore going to depend hugely on
people's practical circumstances and their cardiovascular fitness and the time available they've
got.
So I don't think it's appropriate to say, Oh well, nobody can do more than 12 exercises or nobody
can do more than fitness.
It's like, well, it depends on your fitness and who you are and your age and your practical
circumstances, how long you've got to work out, what machinery you've got available to train with.
Or is it all free weights?
All of those things are going to come into play.
And some people are going to be able to push it to an extreme and do 40 exercises in a session
because they've got two hours, because they're a student and they've got a high level of
cardiovascular fitness and they've got amazing machines available to them and they're a bit
creative.
Fine, OK, yeah, that's going to work.
Somebody else got literally just to Gary's gym with a few dumbbells and a barbell.
They're going to be very, very, very limited and find it very difficult to get to much past 10
exercises, especially if their cardio isn't amazing.
So I think it really is going to come down to individual zones.
And so having a blanket statement like nobody can do more than 12 exercises.
Absolutely.
Just so unhelpful one.
One of the most common questions I get is what is the most amount of sets someone can do in a
workout?
And I'm like, I'll let you know that I've programmed up to 80 sets in a workout.
If I'm doing clusters, I'm doing sets, you know, 5 Rep Max load doing sets of two.
And my whole workout is consisting of clusters.
I've done, you know, 80 plus sets in a single workout.
And then there's other workouts that might get someone which is 6 to 8 sets.
And it's such an unhelpful metric to say what's the top end of sets 1 can do.
Well, it totally depends on exercise selection, on repetitions, on proximity for all of this
matters.
So, you know, it's exactly what you're saying here.
How many exercises, well, are we talking, you know, unilateral, single joint, low repeti.
Like how could you possibly answer that without?
All of these variables, a massively reductionist kind of approach which ignores the fact like just
thinking a set is a set is a set and it's like it's not.
It's like all of these variables go into determining the effects of that set in terms of intrawork
apathy.
So ultimately, how many sets you can do and how many exercises you can do is absolutely variable,
but there are going to be decisions that push you in One Direction, there's going to be decisions
that push you in a different direction.
So everybody's just going to have to start with whatever they can do and then modify.
If they want to do more, they're going to have to modify it in directions that are kind of helpful
to them.
They have to start, you know, if they've got more time.
Totally.
Like if you're going to the gym and you're doing a workout in 40 minutes and you're like, I feel
like that's the maximum.
I'm doing a maximum number of exercises in that 40 minutes.
I'm like, okay, but have you got 50 minutes?
OK, well then start leaving slightly longer rest periods and see if you can now do an extra
exercise.
It's that simple.
Like, or if they're like, I'm doing these exercises and I feel absolutely gassed at the end, I'm
like, OK, well, let's look at the excise selection that you've got.
Are you doing a squat in there?
You know, what multi joint exercises are you doing now that we can kind of make either more stable
or, or actually convert into single joint exercises.
Or you know, are you, what red ranges are you using?
Do you have any ability to drop that red range slightly for some of your exercises?
You don't have to do it for every single one, but can you do it for some of them?
Yeah, I.
Mean that's such a good point there because, you know, you might have some exercises where doing a
set of 6 might have might cause the same sort of, I guess rest period demand than another exercise
where you're doing instead of 20 or 15, you know, And so to say, well, you know, every exercise
needs to be 6 repetitions or can't be, you know, this many or whatever.
It's like, well, again, that's why when I'm programming squats, like more often than not, I'm
programming sub five repetitions in a full body plan where I'm doing, you know, 12 plus exercises
because again, a set of 10 or 15 squats, it's just going to be too long to recover from.
But single limb stuff, biceps curl, stuff like that, more often than not, I'm programming 10 to 15
because it's not worth that extra time to then warm that up and do a set of five.
So repetition, honestly, I think repetition range really should be exercise specific.
Like I know that that's sort of unsensitive.
Stay online.
To call from a practical point of view in terms of the, the, the impact that that excise has on the
rest of the workout from a time point of view, from a cardiovascular sensations point of view,
absolutely.
So that's why I'm saying I think when people are asking for banking recommendations, it's totally
not only the wrong starting point.
What I need to start with is what are you currently doing?
OK, fine.
And do you want to do more exercises or would you like to do more exercises in that workout?
OK, fine.
Well then look down the list of things that you're doing in the Rep ranges and the rest periods and
everything like that and see if there's anything that you can change that will push it in a positive
direction for reducing cardiovascular sensations.
And then you'll probably find that if you make a couple of those adjustments and a space will open
up at the end of your workout or motivational capacity where you'll feel, you'll feel able to just
add one more exercise on, you'll be getting to the end of your workout.
And we go, actually, no, I don't feel too bad, I could do something else.
That's what you'll feel and that's the data point that you're looking for.
You make those adjustments, you get the end of the workout and you actually, I feel like I could do
something extra great.
Then you can include it.
But again, it's about making those small adjustments in positive directions until you get to that
sensation, which is like allowing you then to do something new.
So that's one category of ensure people have.
That's the workout fatigue problem.
So when people say, oh, no, you can't do, you know, that many exercises in a single session because
your end of the workout will be, you know, kind of worthless.
That's what we're talking about.
So the other group of people say you can't do like, you know, 15 exercises in a session because you
won't then recover for the next kind of training session.
This.
Yeah.
I mean, you're laughing already because this fundamentally just just ignores what the post work
affidity model looks like.
I mean, post work affidity model is probably one of the strongest elements in the entirety of all of
my work online.
So basically, post work affidity model is really obvious.
It's very very easy to establish.
Literally, you have got a In the workout itself, you are creating calcium ion accumulation due to
muscle activation or stretch or both.
So those things will cause calcium ions to accumulate in the fibers that will then trigger in
calcium related D mechanisms.
Basically you've got excitation, contraction, coupling failure, you've got cell membrane damage and
you've got myofibrilla damage itself.
Now basically those are literally just direct consequences of calcium accumulation causing calpain
or phospholipase production inside the fiber.
After that you've then got a supraspinal central nervous system fatigue effect which is linked to
the to the inflammation which is clearing away the muscle damage, the myofibular damage.
So whatever myofibular damage you create will be related to the amount of CNST that you create.
If you want another actual technical fatigue mechanism, it's a coordination disruption from the fact
that your brain now will not produce the same force with the same activation.
So the way your brain thinks in terms of movements is these activations produce this force output.
And when you have fatigue present, your brain now has a mismatch between the actual force outputs
and the activation inputs.
And so you actually end up creating a less coordinated movement because your brain only thinks in
terms of activations.
So that would technically be another fatigue mechanism.
Does it make a difference in terms of stimulus?
No, but it does make a difference in terms of the kind of like number of reps to failure that you
can do.
So if that is our post workerity model, then ultimately the amount of damage you create is going to
be the factor that determines how many days recovery you need or how much actual fatigue you
experience.
Fatigue broadly post work FT broadly scales with volume linearly.
So if I do, if I do say for example, literally just biceps curls, then more sets that I do the more
post work FT I create and the more recovery time I need before I can train those biceps again.
But if I create like a substantial amount of muscle damage and I get a large inflammatory response,
I'm going to create superspinal CNST effect then starts to create problems for other muscles as
well.
So I've got these two kind of issues happening.
I've got the actual local fatigue effect and I've also got superspinal fatigue effect.
If I now add in triceps as well, then I'm going to have like, or actually let me do a different
example.
Let me start by saying let's imagine I'm, I'm sort of doing these biceps curls in the context of an
upper lower split.
Like a lot of people program say 2-2 workouts a week, four way for, for total workouts, 22 workouts
per week.
So imagine I'm doing that.
So I'm doing say four or five sets of biceps curls.
We could consider 2 alternative scenarios here either I could add on five sets of triceps
extensions.
So I'm now doing 5 sets of biceps girls, five sets of triceps extensions, total of 10 sets.
Like now I'm going to have like the same local muscle fatigue, muscle damage wise inside the biceps.
I'm going to have pretty much an equivalent amount of that in the triceps.
I'm going to have double the amount of superspinal CNS teeth because I've now got double the amount
of muscle damage.
Very straightforward.
So basically, broadly speaking, if I have 15 exercises and let's say they're all single joint
exercises, if I do 15 single joint exercises, I'm going to have 15 sets worth of superspinal fatigue
and I'm going to have one set each worth of muscle damage.
If I did three different exercises for five sets each and have the same amount of superspinal CNFT,
but I'd have five times as much local muscle damage as I'd have in each of those individual kind of
situations.
The issue though is that, oh, sorry, can I just check?
Does that sound right?
Does that make sense?
Yes, it does.
I'm curious what your next sentence is going to be because I do have a question, but you may.
Answer it.
I think I'm about to answer it.
My next issue is that because this actual inflammation response duration depends on the muscle
damage time to repair, you get a totally different time to recovery of the superspinal fatigue if
muscle damage is more limited in individual muscles.
So if I have 15 sets of single muscle groups being trained, I have the same total amount of
superspinal fatigue on probably day one, but it's pretty much all gone by day 2.
Because the the length of time for which the information sticks around depends on ultimately how
long the most time it takes to repair.
But if I do.
You've dug 15 tiny holes, and each one of those holes is very quick to backfill compared to one or
three massive holes.
Exactly.
Exactly.
So the issue is that, yes, you will get like 15 sets worth of superspina fatigue on day one, but by
day 2 it's pretty much all gone.
If on the other hand, I have 5 sets worth of kind of muscle damage, I'm not going to be recovered
for two or three days.
That's your spinal fatigue is going to then take two or three days to recover.
So reality is that super spinal fatigue people go, oh, well, you know, you're trashing your central
nervous system by doing, you know, 1520 different exercises, full body, whatever.
Yeah, you might feel a little bit rough the following day as if the same way that you would feel a
little bit rough if you did, you know, kind of 5-6 sets of bench, 5-6 sets of overhead press, 56
sets of triceps extensions.
You're going to feel rough either way, but you're going to feel rough longer with the body parts
Blair approach because the muscle damage just takes longer to repair.
Every single data pointer we've got in post workout that just shows that if you create more muscle
damage in the workout by doing more sets for the same muscle group or more stretch position exercise
or whatever, then what you will find is that your inflammation response is lengthened and delayed.
So ultimately it takes longer for the Cal pain process to finish.
It takes longer for your initial process is the inflammation to finish.
Your secondary muscle damage effect gets punted.
You know, much further along in animal models where we go crazy with the muscle damage, you can get
four days before the inflammation really gets going and you actually start to see losses of
myofibular protein.
Obviously in humans we don't see that.
We tend to see most of the secondary natural damage effect is day 2 or back end of day one.
But basically you're only really starting to get information happening on day 2.
Again, we're talking about like muscle damaging workouts, like, you know, kind of 10 sets of
something silly.
But ultimately, you know what we're talking about.
The processes are much earlier than that.
So yeah, basically the full body approach of doing lots of sets but separates across large parts of
the body.
Yes, you will get a very similar immediate CNS fatigue in the following day, but it really clears
very very quickly in a person with the body parts per approach.
So based on what you just said there about that delayed response, so theoretically is it possible
that actually the next day full body might be having or causing more ciprospinal scene as fatigue
or?
You have to be causing more unless you were genuinely, I mean like if muscle mass is equated, sets
across muscle mass is equated, then I think it would be the same.
But you know, if, if, if, if it's not, then I mean if you, I mean like, I can't honestly see that
happening.
But yeah, I mean, if you're doing more.
So you don't think say someone's doing up or lower, you don't think that that they could delay that
inflammation damage?
Response maybe.
I mean like if you were doing, let's say you were doing yeah, I mean let's say you were doing 5 sets
of two exercises for each muscle group in your upper lower split, which is not unreasonable.
I mean like like that they'll do like 5, maybe 5-6 exercises and they'll do four or five sets of
each and that's a big workout.
But you know, I mean that is is done in that scenario, yeah, I think you could create enough damage
in a single muscle that it would pump the inflammation into day 2.
So this is not related exactly to what we're talking about, but that would make me think if someone
were training say upper, lower or two, a split with high enough volumes that you may in fact
potentially be better off training on those two consecutive days and then taking the rest day rather
than 9.
I don't know.
I mean, it's going to be very individual excise specific and all the other variables.
I mean, yeah, maybe.
But honestly, I mean, I don't think it's a good idea to train like that anyway so.
No, no, we're, we're kind of coming up with the best case for a bad sort of.
I I I'm not interested in using my brain power to kind of little about with with exercise routines.
Mitigate some of their yeah.
Silliness.
But you know that that's.
Yeah, so.
But is that clear enough so far?
Because I've got one more thing I want to.
Yeah, yeah.
So the other, the final thing I want to add is people go, people who go well don't not really
interested in your post workout team model.
I don't agree with it or whatever.
You know, I want to focus more on like the autonomic nervous system and the cardiovascular response.
So they basically are going back to like aerobic exercise kind of models and they're saying you do a
strength to work out that's full body, You can have a big autonomic nervous system shift.
It's going to take you a long time to recover from that.
No, it doesn't.
So all the all the autonomic data suggests that no matter what exercise bout you do, you recover
within 48 hours.
Don't care what you do.
They've literally got studies in marathon running showing that it takes 48 hours to clear.
It doesn't matter what you do.
It's one of the most frustrating things that I have seen in exercise science that we can't figure
out what modifies the duration, if anything ever does, of the autonomic nervous system coming back
to baseline.
Because no matter what kind of exercise we seem to throw at subjects, they always seem to get back
to baseline within about 48 hours, maybe a little bit longer than that, but not really meaningful.
So, so ultimately when somebody goes, I don't agree with your, your post vague activity model.
I think it's more about cardiovascular recovery.
I'm like, well, OK, then you recovered in 48 hours no matter what you're doing then.
So you can just literally train every other day or every or three times a week, and you can do
anything.
And the idea that doing lots and lots of exercises would cause a problem for that in their model,
which I don't really think is relevant, but you know, because ultimately the only reason your
autonomic nervous system recovery would be a problem as if you were actually out of breath going
into subsequent sets of your next workout because that's what the autonomic nervous system is doing.
But anyway, you know, in the scenario that you want to use that model, then fine.
I mean, it doesn't matter what you do.
You can be recovered in 14 hours.
Run a marathon if you want.
I mean, it doesn't matter.
So really, even if people kind of just reject the basic post work appetite model that I've kind of
sort of detailed and want to use Kodiosk in the models instead, which I think is mad, but OK, fine.
Even then, you still recovered in 14 hours no matter what you do.
Yeah.
So either way the post worker fatigue issue doesn't persist beyond unless you were doing like 5 sets
per muscle in your full body workout that had your dozen different.
Exercises again that that is not, nobody's going to do that.
I mean like the people who are doing high exercise variety are doing single sets.
Mostly they're doing, I know exactly my point and you know, we could if someone might say, Oh well,
they're doing multiple exercises per muscle, but obviously the intention behind that program would
be that they're biasing different.
Regions of.
So, yeah, most damaged fibers at the top aren't going to be doubled up.
Yeah.
I mean, ultimately this, this is one of those areas where if you actually really dig into the
Physiology, all the arguments against it just fall away because there isn't really a scenario in
which this is an issue.
The only people who think this is an issue are people who haven't actually gone and done all of the
reading.
Well, yeah, I mean, you would only think it's an issue if you don't know what's causing post workout
fatigue as soon as you do, you realise like any other split?
Yeah, the yeah, yeah.
So where does that land us?
Where it lands us is that we can make use of the Physiology to be flexible about the precise number
of exercises that we have in a workout and still have a successful final couple of exercises of that
workout.
We can manipulate running variables very intelligently to avoid creating the excise order effect or
at least minimising it as much as you possibly can.
And that's what a lot of people are.
I mean, we've talked before like some of the really interesting creativity that's going on in the
science based lifting community is around this precise issue.
It's about finding ways to do more exercises involving individually less muscle mass in order to
like, get up to silly numbers of exercises per workout.
And that's cool.
I mean, that's inventive, that's creative.
I, I respect that.
I think it's really interesting.
I'm not going to bury them like that, but that's just because I'm old.
But, you know, I think it's really interesting what they're doing.
And so they get up to really, really crazy numbers and people look at that and go, no, no, no, you
can't do that because they refer back to their norms.
They're like, no, no, no, you've got to do 12 or that's the maximum number.
So, yeah, but you're not understanding that their context is fundamentally different from yours
because they've taken on board the Physiology behind each of the kind of training variables and
exercise selections, and they've started to push those numbers of exercises higher.
Cool.
Awesome.
That doesn't mean that you can do that in a freeway situation in your garage.
No.
So let me ask you this.
So you've made it fairly clear repeatedly that you are not a personal fan like for yourself of
training this way and training with many different exercises.
So how many exercises do you think you could in fact do?
If you want to train full body three times a week, could is.
From want to though, because if I were to change my personally preferred exercise selections because
I prefer to do pulls and presses, you know, and hinges and squat patterns and things like that, I
just prefer to train like that.
I'm old.
I'm not going to, you know, kind of do anything because I don't.
Want to.
So obviously in this mental experiment, you are still the same age you are now.
OK.
But let's say you are trying to program in a way where you are swapping some of those exercises.
Yeah.
So you talk to how many are you doing now?
At the moment you're doing well, half a dozen or so.
Yeah, probably no more than six.
So I could probably double up and do 12 if I was to pick my exercises better.
I'm confident I could do that.
And that's without any detriment at the end of that workout.
It's just not what I that's not just I'm, I'm training for health for, you know, kind of just basic
body composition.
I'm old.
I'm like, people don't realize this, you know, it's.
So we could probably, if, if you think you could do 12, then we could probably take what you think
you could do and then add 20% on to it.
And then that's probably going to land us pretty accurately to where you actually would be able to
do as opposed as opposed to your worst case scenario estimate.
You know, but yeah, it's like I've got other stuff that I want to do.
I mean, it's not my sole focus in life, you know, and it's not even my sole physical activity focus
in life.
But then that's coming back to the motivation piece.
And, you know, the the tricky thing here is it's almost circular because if someone says I don't
want to do it, it's like, OK, well, we could actually program in all these, you know, intelligent
ways to make it possible for one to do it.
But again, if they fundamentally believe that they don't want to be doing it, it's kind of not going
to work anyway because they're going to be demotivating themselves out of it.
Yeah, I think that's why you do see these kind of small communities of people who start to, you
know, push the boundaries of what other people think is is doable because they're motivated to find
interesting and creative solutions to, you know, based on physiological reality to body ordering
programming.
And that's kind of where you see those people emerging, which is cool.
You know, what I'm, what I'm kind of explaining is that the physiological reality is that the
possibilities are larger than most people think they are.
Yeah.
And you can give basic kind of recommendations for people who know nothing about the gym, you know,
and you can say, look, you know, you probably need to limit yourself to 10/12 exercises and, you
know, steer in these directions.
And most people are going to get like, literally just like the programme we started with today.
I mean, you can throw something like that at them and say just do that three times a week or twice a
week if you're, you know, not really that interested in going to the gym.
And, you know, most people will do well, we've got to get this understanding that there is a
difference between not like, OK, so we're all aware that there are there.
There's this thing that, you know, kind of gets bandied around occasionally, which is like a public
health recommendation.
So people like get told, you know, this is kind of a recommendation for your health that
organizations who set themselves up and, you know, deem themselves to have their wisdom to impart
this information.
You know, and then they say this is you've got public health memory.
I mean, ultimately, when fitness influencers are arguing about what people should do when they go to
the gym, it's kind of like a mini version of a public health recommendation.
It's like, you know, people who don't really know what they're doing when it comes to gym.
Here are some guidelines that you can follow.
So like, you know, go two or three times a week, you know, train full body, do the same work every
time, do 1012 exercises.
And you know, you can start to get towards a sort of recommendation or a suggestion, which is going
to be good for most people who just don't know what they're doing.
But ultimately what what we're also aware of is that you can bend those recommendations quite a lot
if you know what you're doing.
Yeah.
And I think this is the important thing.
Like a lot of people, when they're arguing emotionally about exercise numbers in each given session,
they are blurring the lines between what is a suggestion for people who don't know what they're
doing and what is a possibility of people who do know what they're doing.
And you've got to get your head into the two different places to be able to understand why some
people will literally talk past each other for an hour.
Yeah, yeah.
Because one group, people are saying no, no, people can't do that if.
People can't do that.
If people don't do well, people who don't know what they're doing.
Yeah, fine.
Exactly.
That's what the sort of basic guidelines exist for.
But then you've got these other group people who.
Yeah, but we do know what we're doing.
So we can bend the rules.
We can bend the guidelines.
We can go in a different direction.
We can do this.
We can choose to do that.
We can do this.
In this way we can start to create more capacity here, there, somewhere else, and suddenly you've
got a workout that looks absolutely impossible, at least on paper, to people who don't know what
they do.
Yeah, Yeah.
The first category is basically how far can we go while keeping it as hard as possible to stuff up
for anyone.
And it might get you 80% of the way there.
And then you go any further and now it's going to become easy and easy to stuff up if you don't
realize how you should or need to program these other little niche variables.
Exactly.
And the problem is that you've got people out, people who are confusing those two categories and
they what they'll do is they'll then invent quasi physiological reasons for why those guidelines
must always be followed and can never be violated.
And that's when that's where you get the like the autonomic nervous system people they were.
Oh no, no, no.
If you do more than 15 exercises in a workout, your cardio won't recover for the next workout.
Like nonsense, cardio recovers in 48 hours no matter what you do.
Well, it's retrospectively looking for justification for why they've decided they can't do it.
Yeah, they decide.
Well, not just that they can't do, but nobody.
No one can do it.
Yeah.
So this is, this is like this is very similar to the people who the fitness interests have decided
that they want a program like this for themselves.
And therefore that must also be the best possible way to program.
We see those, these people with Gigas who go no, no, no, no.
Not only must my program be the best for me, it must also be the best for everybody, everywhere, all
the time, forever.
You know, I mean, like, whereas I'm the exact opposite.
I'm like, no, no, I train in a very suboptimal way because that's just what I want to do.
But yeah, you've got these kind of.
Yeah.
But it's the same reason they start with, like, they say.
No, no, I'm going to defend this guideline to the death.
And then like they're starting inventing reasons why it has to be like that.
And like, well, no, you start with the guideline because it's a good starting place for most people
most of the time.
And then you accept that if somebody starts to make these adjustments, then if they make enough of
those adjustments, they can get somewhere.
That's almost implausible for most people to be conceived on, but you've got there step by step, by
virtue of doing a series of very specific adjustments in line with how Physiology works, that has
allowed you to make those kind of to make that program work.
And I think that's, that's why we're seeing a lot of confusion online because people are literally
having two totally different starting points and assuming that they're the same thing and they're
not.
There's a totally different situation.
If you're making a blanket recommendation for like most people most of the time, then you're going
to end up with, you know, kind of the basic silver era type program.
If you want to start to say, well, actually I, I'm interested in seeing how far I can go with this,
then actually you've got a lot more flexibility.
And that's where I think a lot of criticism against the science based lifting community at the
moment is directed at, is directed because people are blending those two things and they're looking
at somebody doing 40 sets in a workout, totally different exercises and they go in.
That's impossible.
And the guy is clearly doing it and he's posting it on him on social media.
Well, clearly it's not because he's doing it.
So then you kind of go, OK, well, so where do you go from there?
But what I'm trying to explain is that they're these two totally different like mental frameworks
and 1 is a recommendation framework and 1 is a possibility framework.
I mean, what they're doing in that situation as well is looking at 1 variable in isolation.
They're saying, Oh, well, you know, I think you can do 10 sets or 10 exercises, and this person's
saying they can do 40 and just saying I'm going to keep all of my variables exactly the same and
only change the number of exercises.
Yeah.
And it's a different mindset.
And so I think yeah, all of the arguments are literally just coming down to to a blending of those
two frameworks. 1 framework is like a recommendation framework and the other framework is which has
all its practical limitations in place.
And the other framework is a possibility framework.
It's like, well, what can we do if I'm prepared to break out of those like basic recommendations and
just start saying, well, Physiology underpinning this work like this, therefore do this.
Interestingly, this ties back to evidence versus science.
And like the approaches that people take, the evidence guys will go, well, the evidence says you do
these number of sets and these number of exercises and these unlike and they, so they end up being
trapped inside that guidance framework.
Whereas the science goes, well, this is how underpinning variables are working.
And that's how.
So if I change them so that they don't have the same negative effect, then I'll end up being able to
do more, you know, or you know, I'll be able to change what I'm doing elsewhere and.
I mean, it's what we said with the rest periods before, right?
Like an evidence base would say you do your two to three minute rest period and you're saying, well,
actually maybe a science perspective here.
Yeah, we say you might be spending 6 minutes between one exercise and maybe a minute between
another.
Totally, and that's because you've understood what's actually creating the problem.
Yeah, I think that's a, hopefully it's a helpful framework for people to come back to and realize
that, you know, we're not saying these general recommendations people are giving are bad or wrong.
You know, they're helpful for the vast majority of people.
Yeah.
Totally.
Absolutely.
We're just hopefully, hopefully encouraging people not to speak in absolute and say that there's no
way one can move outside of these guidelines and these are in fact set boundary conditions for every
single person all the time.
And we're saying, well, no, actually, if you do push deep enough into the Physiology, you can start
to push those edges out and ultimately end up with something quite interesting and creative and that
looks very different to what most people maybe are doing.
And if you want to stick with your 6 exercises and do that three times a week or whatever.
That's right.
You can do that.
Thank you.
Yeah.
We're more than welcome to do that, but if you want to experiment and you want to do 12 or 15 or 20,
well hopefully now you've got the tools to do so.
So I think that's that as done.
Do you have anything you want to finish with?
No, I'm good.
I'm also beginning looking forward to the first webinar in the, of course, that we're starting on
Thursday.
I think it'd be very exciting.
So yes, as you said, if people still want to sign up, they can still do that.
Discount is still live.
So obviously it'll be linked from both of our Instagram BIOS.
Please do check that out if you're interested.
Perfect.
Thank you guys for joining us, and I hope you'll join us again next week for another episode.