Episode: 045 Training a muscle 2x per week - Full Body vs Upper/Lower
URL: https://open.spotify.com/episode/3kubNBRXDiFUgx538iI9FY
Published: 2026-03-30
================================================================================

Welcome back.
Thank you for joining us for another episode of Hypertrophy past and present.
And today we're both in different locations, sort of You are your back home, your temporary home.
More or less.
And I'm not more or less yet, more or less yet.
And I'm sitting in a hotel lobby.
But we're making this work.
So thank you for joining us.
Now we have announced a few weeks ago that we have some very exciting in the pipeline and that is a
year long certification course.
Now hopefully you guys all know about this by now because we have talked about it a fair bit on our
last two episodes and on social media.
But if you don't know about it, I'm just basically gonna say you should be signing up to our early
bird offer interest link, which is in both Chris's and my bio on social media because we are going
to be sending out an actually insane early bird offer probably this week and then definitely within
the next two weeks.
OK, so you'll absolutely get an e-mail into your inbox with an absolutely insane early bird offer,
which like from a business perspective, I think my clients would know I'm pretty generous with
business.
Like I, I don't take advantage cost wise.
And you presented me with an offer that I was like, Oh my God, that is like next level.
I don't even, I pushed back on it and you're like, now we're doing this.
So this is absolutely not enough for you guys.
Making making it clear that it's all my fault.
In case anyone wasn't aware yet, it's all Chris's fault, so make sure you sign up to that e-mail
list.
Is there anything you want to say about it?
No, not really.
I'm just super excited to finally get this project going.
I think it's going to be a lot of fun.
I think the webinars are going to be really, really cool.
I've got loads of cool stuff to go through, lots of new Physiology, lots of relevant Physiology for
helping people take that next step.
Get from being a really good personal trainer with, you know, the average person to being able to
handle, you know, much more complicated kind of circumstances.
Older people, people using, you know, anabolics, people in severe caloric deficits, those kind of
things.
So I'm just really going to take people to the next level and be very, very exciting project to work
on.
I think we've got a really good combination of kind of sort of tools, if you like within the in the
course because we've got the presentations every month.
We've also got these kind of case studies.
So that's going to be very cool because to actually walk through how to implement the stuff, you
know, in, in kind of real life situations and make it work, even when the kind of the case maybe
doesn't fit perfectly with what you're expecting to see or what you've been prepared to work with.
You kind of say, OK, well, how can I modify this?
I think that's one of the, the areas where people can most grow is this ability to go, what are my
fundamental principles?
Rather than saying, you know, this is what I always do, you know, it's like, this is how I always
program and I'm going to try and fit the round kind of peg into the square hole or the square peg
into the round hole.
And it's like, well, how can I make this person fit into the way that I already do things?
So I'll hang on a minute, go back to first principles, go back to Physiology and go, this is the
problem this person is having or this is the sort of situation this person is in.
How can I use Physiology as I understand it to make sure that I write the best program and support
this person in the best possible way?
And if you can do that, then basically anybody who arrives, you can instantly, you know, kind of fit
the program that you want to write to the person's scenarios or situations.
And you're not kind of missing anything.
And it's because you fundamentally understand the first principles and you've gone kind of all the
way through from kind of Physiology through to practice without any kind of obstacles in your way.
I think that's where people can most grow because most people are just kind of going, here's my
method and I apply this method to people.
I'm like, yeah, but what happens if this person's situation don't allow, doesn't allow you to kind
of use that method, then you're stuck on you because you don't have the flexibility.
Exactly, exactly.
I mean, that's what trips coaches up all the time, you know, all like, so me and my mentoring
clients, they're coaches who have done, you know, they've done certification after certification.
They've done all this extra education work and they've got a lot of, they've got a lot of knowledge,
but then they present me with the case and like, this person doesn't fit the, the standard, I guess,
formula of what I've been, what I've been taught to do.
What do I do now exactly?
And often what I see people do is I kind of try to throw everything at it.
Look at the case that they've given me and it's like, OK, you're, you don't know what to do.
So you're using every single tool in your toolbox and putting all of them there hoping that
something will stick.
And So what we've done is identify who are these complex clients you're going to get, who are the,
the clients you're actually going to have to work with, right?
You're going to be working with people who've done it all before and it's still heart gainers and
aren't seeing the results of what you want to see.
You're going to be working with older clients, you're going to be working with clients who get
injured.
You're going to be working with clients who have gastrointestinal issues, working with clients who
have high stress in the life, who have poor sleep.
All these issues that you're going to be facing and the tools that you might have, maybe the way
you've been taught to use them aren't going to work on a particular order, aren't going to work.
And so we're actually going to talk through, well, how do you modify this?
How do you adjust the program to actually work for that client or for that client or for that client
at this point in time?
And then when this context changes, now you can modify it like this.
So it's going to be really heavy application and theory, which I think is going to be the beauty of
actually marrying those two together.
Absolutely.
It's it's going to be a very cool project.
So yes, if that sounds exciting or interesting, then please do sign up to the e-mail list and we
will get you the offer for the early bird kind of discount probably, yeah, sometime next week.
Very soon, yeah.
And just a couple of common questions I've had on that.
Just say it was on the same page.
So some people have asked, well, what if I'm in a different time zone where it doesn't work well.
So all the webinars, both the because we've got webinars and also tutorials, which we will be a
webinar as well, but it's going to be case studies based on the last topic.
So all of that's going to be recorded.
So if you sign up, you will get access to recordings.
If you can't attend live, if you're doing doing the tutorials and and the certification option,
you'll be able to send in case studies and they'll be picking through case studies ahead of time for
the tutorials.
Even if you're not there live, you can still submit case studies we might cover in those tutorials.
So that's, you know, not an issue if if you're concerned that you're on a weird time zone or your
work schedule changes or whatever.
I think that's the main question I'm getting at this .0 And lastly on it, we have posted the
different topics this week.
We do.
So if you have been wondering, because I was getting a lot of questions, what kind of topics you
guys going to cover?
We both have a post if you jump in our social media, it's called Transcend coaching certification or
curriculum.
And then you can scroll over and you can see what the the 12 topics are for the certification
course.
OK, that's a good mouthful.
Let's jump into today's topic.
So we are covering a element or component of training splits.
Now we're going to do this from a slightly different angle.
We've talked in the past about different splits.
We've talked about upper lower versus full body.
We've talked about how to turn full body into upper lower if it's too much for you in a single
workout, how you can split it up and train it over 6 workouts in the week.
And we've talked about silver hero lifters like Clancy Ross, who did similar methods to that.
And today we're actually going to talk about upper lower versus full body, but in the context of
doing each two days per week.
Now, I've actually got a training group for people who want to train twice a week and we do full
body twice a week.
And my experience with that group has been that I actually think full body twice a week is one of
the most underrated splits.
And it's interesting as a coach, I came from a background where like I'm almost ashamed to admit
this, where we would basically say, if you can't train four times a week, like maybe if you could do
three times a week, we can make it work.
OK, we're going to have to do full body.
But you know, and, and full body was kind of like the worst of all the options.
It's only for beginners.
But hey, if that's all you can do, we can kind of do full body three times a week and whatever.
And you maybe you'll get something out of it.
But if you can't do that, it was kind of like, don't even talk to me.
I can't do anything for you if you're doing twice a week.
Nah, my hands are tied.
It's not going to work.
And that was very much what we were taught.
You know, this was sort of the old school.
I don't want to name names of different sort of, you know, pedagogy that we'd sort of inherited.
But that was very much belief that twice a week simply will not work.
And seeing the people in my group who are doing twice a week, I mean, physiologically it makes
sense, right?
I mean, after all our conversations, I was like, of course it's going to work.
Of course we can program twice a week and get amazing results.
But people who are seeing like incredible results, I'm talking people who have been in a training
for years that had been doing maybe 3 or 4 times a week and they've dropped down because we may be
playing a sport or maybe they've just gotten busier or whatever.
Maybe they're a new parent and seeing incredible progress in twice a week.
So if you can only track train twice a week or train a muscle twice a week, absolutely it is a split
that you can see amazing results on.
But we're gonna talk about what are the pros and cons to doing it as an upper lower split or doing
it as a full body split.
Who it might work better for doing one of the other or at least some of the pitfalls or some of the
the programming variables you might need to be concerned about if you want to make it work the best
possible way for you.
Now I've got a silver golden.
I don't know what you're going to call it.
This is it's kind of that space in between.
We have talked about this a little bit before This is a guy named Chuck Sipes and Chuck was, he was
competing in like the early 60s, right.
So at this point anabolics did exist.
Supposedly Chuck Sipes didn't take anabolics.
He was sort of quite oppositional to them.
But this program was a late 1960s program, OK.
So certainly anabolics did exist, were being used quite widely at this point.
So I don't know if we could call this a pre steroid plan or a steroid plan.
It is a steroid era plan from someone who supposedly was not using steroids.
But that is sort of irrelevant more or less, because I just want to talk about this overall
structure of this plan.
So Chuck talked about this as a a beginning phase.
So not for a beginner, but he would use it as a beginning phase for someone who is going down like
competing, say that we're going to work towards a bodybuilding show.
This was kind of where someone would start.
OK, so they've got, you know, a few years of training under the belt and OK, now we're going to sort
of, you know, dial it in.
We're going to work towards a show.
And this is where we start now I'm just going to say the plan.
It's an interesting plan.
So we've got a upper lower, kind of upper lower.
It's a two way split and it was repeated 4 times per week.
So each work it was done twice per week.
So workout A is it starts with squats and we've got four sets of 6 squats.
Now the squats were done using it was like breathing squats.
OK, so this was a a fairly common silver area method.
Period Rated talks about a lot as well where you would for example take in this case 2 deep breaths
between each repetition.
So generally it would allow one to use a slightly heavier load.
Obviously in the context of squats, you've got a heavy bar on your back, so there's some fatigue
from that as well.
But generally you would be able, because it's a a bit of a rest pause, you would be able to use
slightly heavier loads.
So we've got 464 sets of 6 repetitions with this slight rest or, or, or I guess rest pause between
each of those repetitions.
Then we do the same thing for deadlifts.
We have four sets of four this time, but again, two breaths between each repetition.
Now with deadlift, obviously the weight is on the floor, so it's a little bit easier to do this rest
pause style.
And then we've got shrugs and a barbell row.
Now these were both done for for four sets of 6.
Obviously these are upper body exercises, so it's not a true upper lower.
And that was it for workout A Workout B, we start with a barbell bench and we've got six sets and we
do 664422.
So as the reps are descending, the weight is coming up and then we've got a barbell behind the neck
press, which honestly is probably, I would say my favorite lift and is certainly a favorite of
silvers for silver lifters.
And that's done for four sets of 6.
And then we've got cheating barbell curls, which we've talked about a little bit before.
Reg Park was a a fan of these.
And so for the way these are done, basically you're just using a little bit of body English, a
little bit of momentum to get it up.
And so again, it's going to allow you to use slightly heavier loads than one would otherwise use.
So that's four sets of 6.
And then concluding with abs, and he didn't specify that you had exercise, but presumably some kind
of crunch or maybe a hanging leg raise or something like that.
And that would be done for two sets of 20.
So that day is an upper day.
But obviously, we don't really have back work days.
Put the back work onto the lower body day, four days per week, fairly low reps, moderate volumes.
What do you make of that?
Yeah.
So just picking up straightaway and what you said there with the volumes, this is well within
recoverable kind of volumes.
So broadly speaking, you know, I often say three sets three times a week or 3 1/2 * a week, sort of
maybe five sets if you're training a muscle twice a week.
And that falls inside the recoverable kind of volumes with moderate loads to failure.
I would say probably what he's doing here with his six reps with some breaths between probably ends
up in about the same kind of territory.
So I would say he's probably a set kind of short of hitting the top end of his recoverable sort of
capacity.
So I think this is unlike the previous Chuck Sykes program that we looked at, which was well
outside.
Recoverable volumes.
Definitely a golden era, man.
This is actually pretty much what I would expect.
I've I think I've actually done a split like this at some point in the past, maybe sort of 1520
years ago, I think I probably did something very much like this.
This would have been kind of what I did before I went on to full body and stayed there.
I I kind of realized that sort of up a large didn't suit me at all, but this was probably something
that I would have played with.
I actually like it a lot looking at it.
I mean, I know that if I did it, I would just hate it after a couple of weeks.
But I I actually like looking at it.
It kind of I, I can look at it and I go, yeah, I can do that.
It doesn't, it doesn't trouble me.
It doesn't feel like I would be beating myself into the ground.
I'd feel like I'd worked reasonably hard, but I'd actually got some quality work done.
And I like the exercise selection, you know, as a, as a, as a workout based around free weights,
which obviously it is.
So presumably that was the context.
I like it.
I mean, obviously squat, you know, kind of deadlift shrugs and and a row.
Presumably when he says lat row, he means it's a narrow grip.
That's nice.
I mean, it's a it's a solid set of exercises.
It works well and there's nothing kind of, you know, overlapping too much there.
He's definitely training different stuff.
And then the other day bench press.
I like that.
Obviously behind the neck press, very solid choice.
I wouldn't probably do cheating curls, but OK curls.
That's fine.
In terms of what's missing, I would say probably, you know, the pull up, if he had a pull up in
that.
I mean, the fact that Chuck Sykes doesn't have a pull up in there is a bit crazy.
But yeah, I mean, a pull up would have been a good addition somewhere.
But I guess with deadlift strokes and Rose, he's probably feeling like he's he's probably hit back
quite kind of.
Hard.
I mean, you'd probably want to split the volume then between the grow and the.
Pull up, Yeah.
I mean, that would be the obvious thing to do.
Or if time wasn't an issue, you could program very low reps on the pull up.
This would be something I would do where I might say then do you know 3 or 4 sets of two on the pull
up?
Yeah, exactly.
Exactly.
Yeah.
And then I mean again, the fact that he's not got dips in there again is a bit mad being being Chuck
Sipes.
So and I'd probably have dips in on the other days, the Tuesday, Friday sessions.
Which might cover the the long head which obviously.
Might cover the long head here a.
Point on that I want to make with the exercise selection you're pointing to and you're saying, hey,
you know we're missing like a frontal plane pool, we're missing a long hair triceps exercise, we're
missing even calves or gastrocnemia as well.
This is.
My next comment coming up.
And then also, you know, mostly missing hamstrings and certainly the the two joint hamstring muscles
there.
But one thing that I think is interesting, looking at plans like this, and I don't I don't want to
undersell how important this is for lifters is you may not need to actually train every single
master region, depending what your goal is.
And it's easy to look at a plan or it's easy to write a plan and think I need a rec fam exercise in
and I needed to join hamstring exercise in and I need a long a triceps long head exercise.
I need this and I need that.
But is your goal to be a bodybuilder?
And sometimes, like, I might talk to someone and they might say, oh, my goal is I just want to build
a bit of muscle.
I just want to, I want to look like I go to the gym.
It's like, OK, well, you probably don't need three different hamstring exercises.
You know, look at a lot of these silver air lifters who are doing nothing to dead the deadliest.
Like one exercise that doesn't even hit the hamstrings very well.
And they looked freaking amazing, right?
So I think it's easy to look at a player like this.
And oh, man, it's so much missing.
And yeah, if you want to get on stage there is a fair bit missing, but if you just want to be
stronger, honestly if you want to be stronger than 99% people in your gym and still look like you
left.
Pretty good this program would work.
This is good.
This is a really good program already, even without the modifications that I've met.
Yeah, this is a really good program.
No, it is.
I mean, it genuinely is.
It fits inside recoverable volumes.
He's using pretty heavy loads.
I mean, for me, 6 is a fantastic number of reps.
It really is.
It kind of my, my Rep range from the beginning has been five to seven.
I've always been saying I think it's a fantastic place to to work in that Rep range if you can.
And obviously these exercises are pretty much all good choices for that Rep range, you know, and
it's a good selection of exercises.
As I say, it's not, there's nothing redundant here.
It's not overlapping massively.
So he's, he's, I mean, like, but as you say, I mean, I personally would split some of these four
sets out into twos and do probably 2 rows and two, you know, kind of pull ups.
That would be my preference.
But even as it stands, it's a really, really solid program because if you're training the same
exercises twice a week, and this is something that really needs highlighting before we move on, he's
doing these workouts twice per week each.
So it's the same workout done twice per week.
So he's doing the squat down, the shrug row twice per week.
He's doing the bench press, behind the neck press and cheating girls and AB stuff twice a week.
He's not changing the exercises and doing, you know, four different workouts.
And I think that's really important to highlight here.
Even though it is into the golden era, he's still following that silver era mentality of going,
well, I need to do the same exercise twice a week or there's no point in doing it really.
I mean, with four sets per exercise, if he were to change these exercises up and do different
exercises, he'd be just about spinning his wheels because he'd basically be on maintenance.
You know, the maintenance literature is super, super clear.
There's, you know, at least four solid studies in different populations.
We've got a couple in previously untrained people before they did a training program and then
obviously they do a kind of maintenance period after that.
We've got one in endurance cyclists, obviously pretty big kind of exercise history behind them.
And then there's one in older people, older men I think.
And all four show exactly the same thing.
Do 3 or 4 sets once per week for a muscle group, for an exercise, and you end up basically spinning
your wheels.
So any fibers that are uniquely trained by the exercise once per week are just going to be held on
maintenance.
Yeah, the overlapping ones you're going to grow, but the ones that aren't overlapping or not are
just going to stay static.
And I think that's really, really important.
That is.
And that's one of the things I really like about this.
I mean, so many things.
It's like the volume works.
The exercise selection is good.
Not amazing, but it's good.
And as I say, the frequency is nailed down at least within that twice a week framework.
Really good.
And that's 664422 for the bench.
I really like that.
Actually.
I, I that is a Rep set scheme that I still use with clients today.
And I almost exclusively use it in a two way split like this.
Because one thing you will notice if you're doing many sets, you're doing 46 sets, even if it's
recoverable volume, it does take a long time.
And that is one of the limitations I would say with doing full body is you're kind of generally
limited with this set and Rep schemes you can do.
So maybe for one exercise or work out, you can do something like this.
But generally you're kind of limited to, you know, one or two, at most maybe three sets.
You're not going to want to do a whole stack of warming up.
You're not going to want to work down to double s or triples.
So that's that's the one thing I think I like about something like an upper lower or push pull, any
of these two way splits is it does allow a little bit more creativity with the set and Rep scheme
like this.
Yeah, totally.
And obviously when you're doing exercises like squats, deadlifts and bench presses, then again,
having that ability to warm up and take your time on those exercises and not have, you know, the
other two, you know, kind of coming up after them is definitely positive.
So, you know, that's why when I and the other podcast to do is Rob Marceri, we talked about
powerlifting potentially working very, very well with Apollo splits because you don't want to have
to go through the entire warm up process to get up to your and a squat working way and then do the
same thing with your bench press, then do the same thing with your deadlift and then crawl out of
the gym on your hand and knees 3 1/2 hours later.
You know, it just isn't an enjoyable experience.
So kind of splitting that into two separate workouts can work really well.
It's not a, you know, physiological limitation in the strictest sense of the word, but it it kind of
definitely feels like 1.
Yeah, but no, I I've got a lot interestingly because when you, when we talked about this podcast
topic before we jumped on the call today, you said, oh, well, let's just do this workout plan today
because I don't think there's another scenario where I'm likely to.
I was expecting a really kind of, you know, sort of boring potentially, you know, not very exciting
or usable usable plan.
But you've given us something.
It's actually pretty cool.
I really.
Like this.
Yeah, if if one, you know, you're working out of a home gym, you've got plenty of weight.
But you know, I don't have machines.
That's why it resonates with me, actually.
Yeah.
And look, it would be a fun plan.
I like plans like this.
I like these more like sort of I guess strength focused.
Yeah, it's a power building plan, isn't it?
Really.
Yeah, exactly.
You know, if you include a couple of those exercise selection things that you mentioned, you can
really well round this out to be a decent hypertrophy plan as well.
Yeah, I mean, and there's kind of little tweaks that you could make that would that would kind of
make it quicker and easier to do.
So like the deadlift, I would probably, I would probably end up doing as something more like a a
block pull.
Just take take the first kind of, you know, 3 to 6 inches off the ground just to kind of stop it
from feeling like death and probably maybe even stiff legged.
Yes.
So it starts to become a much more interesting kind of hamstrings of Doctor Magnus exercise there.
Gives you a little bit more coverage, a little bit less, a little bit faster to recover from, a
little bit more enjoyable, to be honest.
So I think there's some small things there that can work.
But yeah, just I've been surprised by this.
I think it's actually really good.
So where do we want to go with this?
We want to talk about comparing now an upper lower which is done twice per week like this to a full
body done twice per week ready to start.
Yeah.
So the context for this is that I've had a couple of questions on my, when I do my Instagram
questions once a week.
I had a couple of people saying, OK, fine.
You know, I get the idea that three times a week is probably or three times a week full body is
probably better than, you know, upper lower kind of standard of, you know, 2 workouts of each type
per week.
So four times a week total workouts.
You get the idea that three times frequency per muscle is better than two times frequency per
muscle.
But what happens if we compare full body twice per week with upper lower in the standard format of
two workouts of each type per week, so 4 total workouts.
So you're getting basically going to the gym twice a week for your full body, or you go into the gym
four times a week for you're up or lower.
But obviously you're still ending up in the same muscle training frequency in both programs.
Which of the 2 is better?
And there's actually quite a lot to say about this.
It sounds like it could be a short conversation, but actually there's quite a lot to say.
What I suggest is that we kind of hammer out the physiological bits first because personally, I
actually think the more interesting conversation is in the practical side and the application side.
Because I think where we're going to end up, not to jump too much air, but we're going to end up is
that it really depends on who you are, which of these two are going to be better.
But anyway, let me kind of sort of jump into Physiology first.
So physiologically it looks like you're doing the same thing, but there are differences.
So if I do, if we say, OK, we're going to start out by just comparing literally exactly the same
sets, reps, exercises, everything and just literally apportion it differently.
Then what you're going to get then is a what looks like a fairly long full body kind of work out
twice a week and you're going to get sort of comparatively shorter individual workouts in your upper
lower split.
So straight away you can see you're going to end up with a longer full body workout.
That means that your back end of that workout is going to experience the exercise order effect where
you can have a reduced level of motor unit recruitment because of the build up of the sort of
inflammation and the cardiovascular sensations.
And you're going to end up kind of hitting lower levels of recruitment and therefore essentially
experiencing supraspinal CNS fatigue.
So your back end of the workout is going to suffer because of that kind of longer workout that
you're doing in each session.
And the upper lowest bit, you're not going to have that problem.
You're going to be able to hammer out the entire kind of workout each time and probably still be
fresh enough to get a solid kind of level of recruitment out the end of your kind of set of
exercises.
So straight away, I mean, and that's something I think most people on in the kind of social media
space at the moment, they're arguing about this.
I think most people get that they can see that they can experience that for themselves.
They know that they crawl across to the kind of, you know, sort of seated leg curl at the end of
their full body workout.
And it's the last exercise they're doing.
They don't put their heart and soul into it because they've kind of done, you know, sort of seven or
eight exercises already and they're just kind of done with.
It and we've talked about ways to test that out if you're doing full body want to.
See how bad the effects is?
Just move and exercise from one end of the workout to the other.
If, Yeah, especially if that's the first exercise for that muscle in that workout or you put it at
the start.
Yeah.
And you know, what you'll see is some people will be vastly different.
You know, some people will find anything beyond 810 sets, they're going to see a huge detriment.
And then other people like, you know, I can do 20 sets, I can do 25 sets and I'm losing 1 repetition
at the end.
So it is going to be a significant and you know, obviously there's going to be some physiological
stuff going on, but even some of that's just going to be motivation.
And some people hate the idea of doing long workouts.
And some people like really driven, they love being in the gym and they feel great.
Absolutely.
So, So, yeah.
So that's kind of something I think that most people don't recognize just intuitively.
They're going to see it happening.
They're going to relate to it.
What's harder to see is the problem that we get with the upper lower split.
So if you're doing 4 workouts per week, you are absolutely going to have some to back-to-back.
That means that you're going to the gym the following day and you've got all of your muscle damage
created by the previous day workout.
That's going to create an inflammatory response that's going to then produce supraspinal CNSD and
you're just going in from the first exercise in your workout.
You're already now in that super binal CNFT state.
You're not going to hit high recruitment in that first or any of the exercises in that workout
because of what you did the previous day.
So just to be absolutely 100% clear, what I'm saying is if you do a bench press workout one day,
like we had the program from Chuck Sipes and you go in the following day and you're doing squats,
your squats are not going to be hitting Max recruitment because of the bench press workout you did
the previous day.
Because the damage you created in the pecs and adults triceps, it's going to produce an inflammatory
response that is going to then tell your brain that you are fatigued, tired, and it's going to
reduce the amount of recruitment you can achieve at maximum tolerable perception of effort.
So just to be again, 100% clear, you are going to feel like you are exerting efforts.
And this is the really important thing that people I think miss and they go, oh, no, I can still
exert maximum effort when I did bench press yesterday.
Yes, you can absolutely your maximum tolerable perception of effort is being hit.
It's just no longer corresponding to your maximum central motor command because you are feeling
other stuff that is contributing to your effort perception, and therefore you're hitting Max effort
perception before you now hit maximum motor unit recruitment.
This is the psycho biological model of fatigue, so you don't know there's any difference.
You still feel like you're exerting Max effort.
You're not actually now hitting Max recruitment.
So really big important point there.
There is a difference between Max effort and Max recruitment.
If we are carrying any kind of sensations from other stuff and obviously the day before, having a
workout in that kind of day before is going to create that problem.
So that that's basically what it comes down to.
He's got either the problem of the back end of the workout being kind of low recruitment because of
the previous exercises and sets we've done on the day, which is the full body problem.
Or we're ending up doing kind of a sort of entire workout in a suppressed state because of the
previous days workout creating damage and inflammation and therefore superspinal CSD.
So on balance, it looks like the upper lower is going to be slightly worse because it's hitting your
entire workout from a negative perspective, whereas the full body actually only is the back end of
the workout and it suffers.
And you can kind of then start to strategically decide how you want to kind of address that.
Obviously though that up or lower, it's only going to be two of those four sessions where you're
going to have that issue.
Sure, Potentially, yeah, if you're comparing like with like.
Like volumes?
Yeah.
Exactly.
And if we're sticking, if we're sticking with relatively kind of sensible volumes, I may be sort of
two or three sets per muscle group, then you're probably going to be OK if you start to push the
upper lower split and start to say, well, actually I want to take advantage of the fact that I'm
doing.
And this is where it gets interesting.
And this is where people are arguing now online because they're saying yes, but because I am going
to four Times Now, I can do four or five sets per muscle group per workout.
Whereas you can't do that with your full body twice a week because you'd just be there all day and
you'd be miserable by the time you at the end of it.
It's just not going to happen.
Nobody's going to do that.
I agree nobody is going to do that, but that doesn't mean that it's worse because if you do do four
or five sets per muscle on your upper lower split, you are going to absolutely have a problem in
your next workout.
Absolutely it's going to be pretty bad.
So you are going to have a quite a severe super spinal CNS effect on next workout.
Let's walk people through that.
So obviously in the context of full body and you know, normally we're talking about full body diet
three times a week.
I'm just going to use that as an example here.
We would normally say that if we're using normal repetition range is to say like above 5 or 6
repetitions or you know, even 8 or 12, whatever, that that the recoverable volume per muscles are
usually going to be around three sets if you're doing it three times a week, right?
Yes, obviously if you're doing double S triples, OK, you can do more sets.
We're not talking about that.
So the argument being made would be, OK, you're limited probably to about three sets three times per
week if you're doing a full body.
But if you're doing upper, lower, and each thing is being trained, each muscle being trained twice a
week, you can do five sets and you'll recover.
And so people are looking at it saying, well, how much volume can I recover from if I'm doing this
split?
Oh cool, I can do 5, maybe I can do six sets, whatever it is.
And you're saying, well, that's the wrong question because when you do that and you just maximize
how much volume you can take in a single session, all you're doing is increasing the amount of super
spinal CNS fatigue for the next workout.
Yeah, which is not ideal at all.
I mean as we said with the church sites worker, he's doing that, he's doing 4 sets in each worker.
And like I'm still think it's a good plan.
I mean it can it be better?
Yes, absolutely.
But don't forget that a lot of those, not all, but some of those sets are this kind of cluster thing
that he's doing.
He is, he is, he is on the, he's on the heavy end of the spectrum and he's absolutely kind of trying
to, you know, kind of make it work.
But he's still suffering the issue where he's going to come back the following day and he's not
going to.
Be still going to be some damage and will of course.
Yeah totally.
And even the ABS where he was pushing reps up, he was only doing 2 sets.
So there was, I think, some consideration here.
Recognition of it?
Yeah, exactly.
Yeah, recognition of it.
So, but in terms of the debate that's going on at the moment, people are going, you know, if I do
four times a week, I can go to the gym 4 times and you know, I can end up doing loads more volume
per session and then I'm going to end up with more hypertrophy across the week.
And I'm like, well, you might see a faster rate of progress, but you're going to plateau earlier
because you aren't going to be able to.
You're going to be constantly in the state of superspinal CNFT, especially on, as you say, 2 of the
workouts per week, which means that you know, whichever way you cut to whichever way, whichever set
of workouts you put second, you're never going to reach your maximum muscular potential on those
muscle roots you're training on that second workout.
It's just not going to happen.
So I think it's a little bit of a shortcut that isn't worth taking.
It's like that is going to move you quick more quickly in the short term because yeah, you're going
to potentially make a little bit more growth on the fibers that you are training.
But when you start to kind of plateau, you can't really go any further than that.
You're just going to get stuck.
So, so yeah, so that's I think that's really what it comes down to is this playoff between the
within session fatigue versus the post workout fatigue.
And when people are saying, Oh yeah, but I can do more, more volume on the upper last.
But I'm like, yeah, but it doesn't help you the way you think it's helping you.
And you made the point that it's this is difficult because you can't measure this easily.
You can't measure the post workout super spinal CNS fatigue the next day and all the way you can.
Measure within session volumes.
Yeah, exactly.
You can't get this acute feedback where you're just testing an exercise.
You have to try one for a while, see what the progress is like, change it up, give yourself a rest
day, see if you like.
That's a bit of a even for me, aware of all this stuff.
It's still hard for me to track those my new changes.
Really.
Yeah.
And it's something like, to be honest, it's something I've, I actually significantly changed my
opinion on.
And I was telling you before we hit record that I'm now quite reluctant to program 2 workouts
back-to-back for most people, most clients and for myself as well, because I do undulate between
doing full body and doing upper lower just based on my schedule.
And for me now if I'm going to do upper lower, I'm going to do upper day off, lower day off, upper
day off, lower def.
I'm not going to do 2 sessions consecutively and this again, it's very hard to quantify, but how I
feel about it at the moment, I actually think that the Super spinal CNS fatigue on that second
workout, the consecutive workout, I think I've really underestimated that in the past and I think
this is something people are overlooking.
I agree.
And I think the easiest, and this is this is a separate kind of framework now, but the easiest way
that I've found to show people how big the post workout CNFT problem is or the post workout fatigue
problem is, is to is to just take your existing program.
So for example, maybe you're doing full body three times a week and you're doing three sets per
muscle group and that could be three sets of 1 exerciser.
It could be 3 set protectors at one set each.
Doesn't really matter.
So whether you do maximalist or minimalist or anywhere in between, it really has no, it doesn't.
It's not important.
And then literally, so just add an extra set for one of the muscle groups and just watch what
happens.
And I guarantee maybe it won't happen with one extra set, but it absolutely will happen with two.
So if you go from one, say, doing three sets per muscle group three times a week and go to four,
you're probably going to notice your progress either slows down or stops.
Try 5 and it absolutely will stop.
That's the easiest way I've found to demonstrate someone to prove to someone that this high volume
stuff is not a good idea because they're making really great strength gains with their three times a
week, three sets per muscle group.
And then you just add one more set or two more sets per.
Don't do this for every muscle group, obviously, because you don't want your progress to complete
and stop across the board, but just to test it and demonstrate it to yourself so that you know that
this actually works in practice rather than just kind of is, you know, hot air on the Internet.
Literally just pick an exercise and do I've done this.
I absolutely was flying through a set of strength games on a particular machine exercise that I've
been working at and I was doing three sets three times a week and I put it up to four and I
absolutely immediately hit the break wall.
It just stopped.
That was that was me.
Now I'm kind of the definite kind of sort of susceptible to muscle damage under the spectrum
actually for certain muscle groups.
So that's not surprising.
But I think most people will find that they hit a brick wall with either four or five sets if they
do that.
So that's for me been the simplest way because what we're talking about at the moment, like you were
saying, is so complicated to kind of see the root.
But I'm like, if you really want to see how big a problem excess post work apity is, just pick an
exercise that you're already doing close to maximum recoverable volumes on, or muscle grip you're
already doing close to maximum recoverable volumes on, at least according to the averages.
And then just add one set per worker and just watch.
Watch how you don't make any progress.
Yeah.
So I think an issue that that holds people back and I don't know where this fits into it.
Obviously this isn't a sort of practical programming piece, but you don't need to stick to a seven
day schedule, and so you can theoretically.
Some of us do.
Some people need to be physiologically.
You're not obligated, no.
Physiologically, you're not obligated.
And this is something for me.
What really clicked is when I saw both, I don't know you're going to feel about this, but when I saw
both Mike Menson during Yates and pre Stirred during Yates.
We've talked about both of these plans on on this podcast before when they both highlighted that
they were getting worse results when they were doing back-to-back sessions and that when they ended
up separating them and taking a day in between, that for me made me think, you know what, as an
advanced lifter, maybe there's something to this.
And I do think that potentially as a less advanced lifter, I wouldn't be as concerned giving someone
up a lower on consecutive days.
Like you said, rate of progress is probably going to be quicker initially, but I do think the
ceiling is going to drop.
And so I do think if you get someone who's an advanced lifter wanting to do a two way split, don't
think that you are certainly obligated just doing up a lower day off, up a lower day off, day off.
You can do up a day off, lower day off, up a day and repeat that, right?
If it works with your schedule even.
I mean, Dorian talked about doing like work at day off, work at day off and then he'd still had the
two days off.
So you you just got this trade off then with frequency and you have to ask the question, what's
going to be more important having that slightly higher frequency or having that recovery period
there.
So is there anything else physiologically to mention or do we want to talk about how one might know
kind of if they might?
Would potentially.
Be better suited to one or the other.
The the big physiological issue is really when you're comparing 2 * a week full body versus upper
lower done muscle training frequency of two times a week before total workouts.
So you basically got the same kind of plan but divided differently or maybe as I say, the upper
lower guys start chasing more volume, but that comes with its own issues and those that's kind of
all the Physiology really after that, I think it comes down to practical side of things.
And I think really just to kind of start with the full body side of things, doing full body twice a
week, you can absolutely and got literature showing this, make really good gains doing single sets,
the same exercise twice a week.
So you literally just pick a whole bunch of exercises you want to do, do a single set of each and do
that twice a week and you'll absolutely make great long term progress.
And you'll probably hit your Max more or less maximum muscular kind of potential with that program
because it might take you a little bit longer than doing it through to, I will tell you three times
a week.
But you know you will get there because you're not getting any of that carryover of the CNST.
You just kind of you're losing a little bit per week on atrophy, but it's relatively small in that 2
* a week kind of scenario.
So I think it is a really solid plan.
Maybe the last exercises of your workout might not quite get there in terms of maximum muscular
potential, but that's a problem that you can kind of work around with motivational stuff and that
kind of thing.
So I think 2 * a week is amazing.
Full body, obviously full body, the same workout every time, because when you start changing
exercises it doesn't work.
For that to work, because what I do like about full body twice a week is you can't stuff up because
like you said, you do single sets.
Yeah, no, it's kind of stiff.
It is, yeah.
The only way you can stuff it up, because I have had people ask about this, is if those workouts are
not evenly spaced.
So if you like, how can you do workouts?
I can work out on a Friday and Sunday and that's it.
Yeah.
That's OK then.
Single sets probably aren't going to quite cut it.
Yeah, that's not so great.
Yeah.
Yeah.
No, no, Agreed.
So, so there can be scenarios when it doesn't work.
But for somebody who's got the ability to carve out an hour twice a week, you know, I mean, it's
incredible.
It really is.
So, I mean, anybody who is randomly listening to this podcast, I don't know why you'd be randomly
listening.
To you stumble.
Across This podcast is your first episode and you're like, what are these people talking about?
And you're kind of just interested in a plan that kind of fits into your lifestyle that already is
quite busy and you just want to kind of look, you know, pretty good, like at the gym and you know,
even very good actually then, but you don't want to make it your lifestyle.
Then just just do 400 twice a week and it's it's incredible.
It will absolutely take all of your boxes going from two to three times a week in full body terms.
You'll get when you're going faster.
I mean really, that's, that's all it is.
So, so I, I'm a huge fan of full body 2 * a week as well as full body three times a week.
For me, the upper lower kind of variation has many downsides.
First of all, the busy person isn't going to benefit from going to the gym, obviously four times a
week, especially if they were to travel there.
You know, I mean, it's right for me.
You can say, oh, I could literally walk 3 minutes down the road and be at my gym and I'm like, I can
get it done and then come back again and carry on with my day.
Most people are going to be travelling a distance and that's going to chew up, you know, 3 hours of
their day potentially to drive there, get changed, go to the gym, get changed, shower, whatever,
come back or go wherever they're going to go next.
So it's a lot of time out of your week to say you're going from full body twice a week to, you know,
kind of up a low of four times a week.
You're losing a lot of your week when that is those extra 2 workouts are being put in there.
So I think really like we saw with Chuck Sipes programme, if you're a kind of someone who's got
their own garage gym downstairs and you want to train in that particular way, actually it starts to
become a lot more interesting to do the upper, yes.
Because, yes, and there's been a lot of people.
Yeah, you can roll out of your house into your garage and sort of do the workout.
And actually now it starts to fit into your lifestyle a lot more easily.
So, so I think that that probably is a major practical consideration.
That's why I said at the beginning, I think that if you're comparing full body twice a week with
upper lower kind of four times a week, you've got to start with practicality or at least address the
practicalities of saying, you know, how easy is it for you to kind of take this time out of your
week?
And is that something that you want to do?
Because straight away you've now got quite a big difference really.
Yeah, yeah, exactly.
You know, for me working with clients is far more clientele have who say, hey, I can mainly do two
or three times a week as opposed to clients should say I can do every day, but I can only do 25
minutes.
You know, I'll get one to the blue moon.
I'll get a client like that, that it'll be 12:50 the other way.
Yeah, exactly.
So I think really practicalities have a major role to play there in terms of what people kind of
what they want to do and what they what they can do and how each of these two splits is going to
work for them.
But you know, fundamentally they're both.
Again, this comes back to one of the frustrations that we have as, as kind of educators in this
space is that people want to make things kind of kind of black and white.
They want to just kind of go, does it work or is it useless?
You know, I'm like, hang on a minute, strength training works.
You know, there are scenarios where you're going to kind of push a program to the point where it
absolutely doesn't work.
I mean, somebody showed me a program a couple of weeks back where basically they were doing
exercises kind of once there was a body part split and they were doing literally not only exercises
once per week for say 3 or 4 sets, they're actually doing muscle groups once per week for three or
four sets.
And I was like, and are you seeing any growth on this?
And like, well, I'm getting stronger.
I'm like, yeah, by you actually seeing any?
No, no, no, not really.
I'm like, well, there you go.
Because maintenance you can't avoid it is it is like that is just how it is.
So if you're training 11 kind of muscle region or entire group, like say right once per week for
three or four sets, nothing is going to happen in terms of long term growth.
It just it will not grow.
So, you know, I think there's certain situations where strength training is going to not really work
as far as most of it concerned, but they're few and far between.
Because as soon as you kind of like do to, I mean, even if you type take a program that I, I
criticize a lot, like a sort of a full body, sorry, not a full body.
I almost never criticize a full body lower split four times a week.
OK, so you're doing 2 workouts with each type, but you now stop varying the exercises across
sessions.
So you're doing different A, you're doing an AB kind of split with both kind of upper and lower or
however you split it.
So they're doing different leg exercises on your first lower day from the other exercises you're
doing on a second load day.
Now even if you do that, if there's some overlap, you are still going to see growth.
You're going to see growth in the overlapping regions are muscle fibers.
So even in the scenario where you know my most criticised program, which is the upper lower with
different workouts on every day, even if you do that, you are still going to see some growth.
It's just not going to be as good as if you stuck to the same exercises on both of your upper
sessions and both of your lower sessions.
So like even the program that I criticise most is still going to work in inverted commas.
It's just not going to work as well as a program where it's done better.
I think maybe that's why there's a lot of confusion online where people be like, Oh no, there's no
difference if you do, you know, twice a week versus 3 * a week, or you do one exercise per muscle
versus multiple.
Because we see that this, what's being talked about as a worse version, still works and.
We've got to get away from this like it doesn't work or it does work.
It's like this can be things in the middle where it kind of works and it's just that there are
better options.
So there's this really big reductionist tendency for people just go, it either has to work perfectly
or it has to not work at all.
I'm like, are you listening to yourself?
It's just like grow up a bit.
I mean, like, I mean, I know that I'm probably one of the oldest people operating in this space
right now, but like, seriously, come on, guys.
You're behaving like teenagers.
Like, so we've got to kind of, you know, understand that there can be programs that give you a
result.
It's just that it might not be the best result.
And just to be clear, it might be not the best result 2 in two possible ways.
Either it might give you a slower rate of growth or it might just not let you get to your maximum
muscular potential.
Those directly separate things.
So a lot of the time, you know, it might give you reasonably similar rate of growth to start with.
It'll just plateau you a lot earlier.
And that's the thing that people I think really struggle with because they just think that faster
rate of hypertrophy means you end up in a better endpoint.
As I know you've got to look at physiologically how this works.
This ties back into what we started with when we're kind of introducing the certification, we're
going to do.
People have to understand how the Physiology is actually working if they want to actually manipulate
programs to get certain outcomes.
If you understand the Physiology, you're just going to make silly, silly kind of conclusions like,
oh, well, a faster rate of growth means I'm going to get to longer term rate hypertrol.
No, that's just not how the Physiology is working.
So I think this is really important.
We always start from the absolute kind of baseline and kind of fundamentals to make these kind of
kind of draw conclusions about what's going on.
Yeah, absolutely.
Yeah.
I think that's an interesting point around the the rate of growth versus the ceiling of growth.
Because you do see a lot of people online talking about things like like multi sets versus single
sets or like consolidated plans where people are doing one exercise per muscle compared to more
Maximus plan where people are doing multiple exercises per muscle.
And those could be two different outcomes, like someone could grow quicker doing a consolidated
plan, they're doing one exercise per muscle, and they're doing multiple sets.
Compared to doing exactly how that can happen.
I mean literally like if I gave two people or even imagine the same person in two different kind of
universes.
One person does exactly the same exercise a couple of times a week, multiple sets.
The other person does 3 exercises per kind of muscle region in exactly the same frequency, exactly
the same total number of sets to failure, all the rest of it.
So what you'll find probably if you start with untrained people is a person doing the one exercise
might see faster rate of growth because they don't have three exercises to learn.
Well, especially if they're doing more like multi joint style exercises as well.
Sure.
So they're going to end up with that kind of more rapid progress to begin with.
But the person who's doing more exercises is laying the foundation for greater ceiling of long term
growth because they are actually going to end up training a wider number of fibres.
The growth is going to be across a larger number of places and you're going to have end up with more
total body muscle mass.
There isn't a scenario in which you can get a higher ceiling of growth with fewer exercises.
It's actually physiologically possible.
Anyone who thinks about this is, is got to realize that conclusion.
The only way you can argue against it is to say something completely unphysiological.
Like the idea that, you know, if I'm training a, a muscle with an exercise, every single fibre in
that muscle is activated.
And I'm like, well, here's like 17 studies showing that you're on.
It's like every single voluntary activation study will show you that you're wrong.
And those are done in highly stable, low muscle mass conditions where you're going to get, you know,
kind of as much activation as you possibly can get.
And even then you're like 1015% short of total.
Even if that were true, though, it's the head still doesn't give any advantage to doing a
consolidated plan.
We're doing a few exercises.
It's saying in this alternative universe where a single exercise is able to activate the entirety of
the muscle, it's just going to produce the same result of doing.
Yeah.
Worst worst case, yeah.
From from a multi exercise point of view, the worst scenario is that you're you're wasting a little
bit of time moving from one exercise to the other.
And a lot of people actually report they get motivated by doing Max effort.
A sort of Absolutely.
There's no doubt about it.
There's.
No, like I've said to people 100 times, like I tell the story all the time.
If I am doing like a multi set protocol, especially on something like a seated leg curl, which I
don't particularly like, I'm guaranteed to find that I'm pushing my Max efforts and I'll get maybe
some like, you know, I don't know, 3 sevens or three fives or whatever out on it. 3 sevens, probably
more likely on a seated leg curl.
And then if I then say to myself, OK, I'm going to have a week where I just kind of do single sets
because I'm cooked, I've got loads of stuff on, I'm traveling, whatever.
And so I go and do single sets and suddenly I'm hitting 10 on my single set.
Absolutely.
Yep.
Yep.
Almost everyone reports that.
And the scenario you just gave there, I think is perfect because what I've always said is something
if you get a day where you're you're stressed out, you didn't sleep well, you're just not feeling
it.
Rather than go in and do your multi set approach where each set of those multi sets, you're
performing worse than normal.
And then you feel even more demotivated.
So you take this sort of as an opportunity to do a single set and you'll actually hit APV.
Turn your your future bad workout into one of your best workouts.
And then you'll be second guessing whether you shouldn't be doing single sets.
It's wild.
So yeah, but basically worst case scenario, you end up kind of in the same kind of ballpark, but
best case scenario, not even best case, moderate case scenario, most likely scenario you get more
motivated and start hitting PBS.
Best case scenario you get this bit greater ceiling effect of your long term muscle growth.
So there isn't really any kind of place where you can argue that doing a single exercise, multiple
sets is going to be better than doing multiple exercises with the same muscle root for single sets.
I mean, these, these kind of comparisons are not really kind of places that you can kind of argue.
I I don't get why people are making the case in the opposite direction is what I'm saying.
Well, you do because you kind of gave the answer at the start of this little Segway was because
people might be seeing faster growth initially.
OK.
Yeah, sure.
They might see because they're making great strength gains because they're focusing so much on that
one exercise.
Well, and you know, to my point that if they are doing, let's say they're doing 3 chest slash
shoulder exercises and they're doing a flat bench and they're doing a well in, I guess in this case,
they're doing consolidated.
So they're doing just bench food chest, right, compared to doing a bench.
But then maybe they're doing a PEC deck and then maybe they're doing a crossover, right?
Obviously in that scenario, if you're doing just bench, you're going to get some triceps growth,
you're going to get some material delt growth.
You're not going to get that with some of those other chest exercises.
So you are going to see faster pace initially if you're selecting.
And This is why people think you're consolidated for what we plan is so freaking good.
They're like, look, I just did a remaining deadlift and I did a bench and I did a a lat pull down
and I grew like a weed.
Yeah, you did initially, but give it two years and then see how much you're going to grow.
You're not.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
No, that's, that's it.
So yeah, I think that's just kind of one of those situations where fundamentals are going to get you
to a better answer than kind of sort of just sort of following methods that people have proposed.
I mean, really this is the same kind of thing as the whole 2 * a week versus 3 * a week kind of
debate, which I've definitely got to run brewing about that because people have been on recently and
they say to me, Oh no, no, no, a few times is the same as three times.
And they just go straight to the outcome data and they go like, oh, you know, we can't show any
studies that are, you know, statistically significant differences between hypertrophy from training
2 * a week versus 3 * a week.
And then they don't tell you the hide the fact that there's also no differences between 1:00 and
2:00, but there are differences between 1:00 and 3:00.
So I mean, anybody with a brain can see that it's just, you know, low levels of power preventing you
from seeing differences between 2:00 and 3:00 and 1:00 and 2:00.
But, you know, fundamentally, we're seeing, you know, kind of 3 is better than one.
Well, if 3 is better than one, and you know not many people are going to disagree with that because
there are outcome studies showing that that is true, then OK, why is 3 better than one?
So well, 3 is better than one because multiple reasons.
Firstly, you've got a non linear dose response of hypertrophy.
So if you try and do nine sets in a single workout and compare that with three sets three times a
week, you are going to have a pretty useless kind of response of hypertrophy from your last couple
of sets of that nine set workout.
But your other two kind of your other program where you're doing 3 * a week, you're going to get
pretty solid result from all of your three sets three times a week.
So straight away we can see the non linear dose response, which means that you've always going to
get a better response from higher numbers of sets per workouts per week with three being better than
one, but probably also three being better than two just because of non linear hyper response to
volume.
So straight away the same logic that applies to one time versus 3 times is going to apply to two
times versus 3 times.
So makes sense.
And they say, OK, well what about the atrophy question?
If I'm training once a week and I've got probably four or five days worth of time when I'm not
growing and I'm actually shrinking, OK, well that same logic applies to two times a week as it does
to one time a week. 3 * a week, or really 3 1/2 * a week is the only kind of protocol.
But that doesn't apply to.
So again, you've got exactly the same logic.
So when we're talking about 3 being better than one, all of the same things apply to three being
better than one as applied to three being better than two.
So you know, it fundamentally follows exactly the same.
What you'll find is that what people try and do is argue two things.
Firstly, they'll try and argue that if you're training twice a week, then you can do a high enough
volume in those sessions such that your post workout stimulus period pushes out to 72 hours.
And therefore you don't have like significant atrophy time when you're training twice a week.
So therefore that problem goes away.
The problem with that is that there isn't a single study showing that strength training post workout
stimulus periods do last 72 hours.
You haven't even got a.
A muscle protein synthesis study that shows that every time we ask them for that data, they show us
an aerobic exercise kicking study that lasted 2 hours.
That's muscle damage, that's kicking, That's not strength training.
So literally an hour of kicking.
I mean, it's nothing to do with strength training.
So that's the only data they've got.
And they're leaning their entire kind of hypertrophy stimulus period on one study, which is not even
in strength training.
I mean, it's just horrific.
So that's the atrophy side of things.
Then they will try and go the other way and say, well, we think that if you're doing full body three
times a week or, you know, training a muscle three times a week, then you're going to have
overlapping stimulus periods.
So with the same idea, they come back with this kind of 72 hour idea, which again, as I say, they've
got no data for.
And then we go, hey, look, you know, we think that you're doing a strength training workout, you're
always going to be over the 48 hours.
That means that when you come back and do your second workout later in the week or third workout
later in the week, you're still going to be in the stimulus period.
He's still going to be don't kind of growing from the previous workout.
Therefore you're not going to maximize your stimulus in those subsequent workouts, which is actually
the reason that we talk about not training every single day of of single muscle routes.
You don't want to do that because you don't want to be in the stimulus period.
The issue is though, that if you look at the actual curve of muscle protein synthesis, which is the
kind of best proxy we've got for the stimulus period in terms of what's going on, all of the spike
in muscle protein synthesis happens in the first kind of maybe 12 to kind of 18 hours.
So ultimately there isn't going to be any meaningful kind of carry over or kind of elevation in in
muscle prone synthesis at the time when you're doing that kind of second or third workout in your
week, you're not going to have a problem with that because you're going to be down like kind of
maybe 10 percent, 20% of our baseline and the spike was up 160%.
So you've still got an absolutely massive distance that you can increase muscle protein synthesis in
your second and third workout of the week and it's not going to interfere with the stimulus you're
getting.
And this is assuming that you do even have an elevation at 72 hours or whatever the number may be,
you know, because I haven't got any strength training studies showing that they all kind of go as
far as maybe 48.
There isn't a measurement point that goes past that.
So when somebody's saying, oh, no, no, we think that the kind of stimulus period lasted more than 48
hours, show me a strength training study that has much protein synthesis elevated after 48 hours.
OK.
And then we can talk.
I'm still right even if you find one but but you haven't got 1 so.
Yeah.
I mean, you saw these other problems, right?
The question is simply.
Well, it doesn't go.
It's, yeah, there's still going to be, there's still going to be other variables and it's still
going to lessen the efficacy.
It's just going to be.
One of the dose response being non linear, which is always going to make three times better than two
times and still got the atrophy problem.
You know, even if it's smaller and you don't have an overlap problem really Because as I say, even
if it does, even if it is still elevated, it's elevated by such a tiny amount.
Even at 48, it's elevated like by 1020%.
So it's really not compared with the massive spike we get in the 1st 12 hours.
Pretty much all the hypertrophy stimulus is happening in the first day after your workout.
So anything like when you leave that and you go into the second day, there's no overlap really
that's have any meaningful nature.
It's not going to cause a problem.
In fact, in my opinion, almost all of that elevation after 2436 hours, if if not, you know, kind of
24, I think it's just must have damage repair anyway.
So if you're not doing enough sets to create damage, you're not going to have enough of a, of a kind
of overlapping stimulus or an overlapping MPs elevation.
So physiologically there the there isn't a way to argue that 2 is even the same as three.
You know, Physiology.
None of that really matters, even like the atrophy doesn't matter, The MPs doesn't matter as long as
your first point stands, which is that there's diminishing terms of volume.
Exactly.
Exactly.
I just don't know how anyone, like, no one's going to get up there and say, yeah, I think that the
12th set of an exercise is giving me as much growth as a first set.
I mean, maybe some people will, but like, how?
How are you going to make that argument and see if you accept that?
We know that.
Well, I think some people were arguing that that that they were.
They were claiming that you can kind of get increasing recruitment over a series of sets.
They kind of like misunderstand how.
Right.
OK, so the second or third it is in fact more effective than the first set of maybe the confusing
pap.
Literally every Yeah, PAP is not post activation potentiation is not a central nervous system
phenomenon, it's a peripheral phenomenon.
You cannot increase motion accruement over a series.
We've even got a really one of my favourite post activation studies, I believe it was even done by
David Ben showed that you can have a post activation potentiation effect as in performance increases
and and while the activation is going down.
So your peripheral effect actually overcomes your reduction in motuin is actually.
Said something really interesting in one of your Q&A's this week, and do you recall what it was?
Because you'd said I would hope I just.
Remember my Q&A's interest?
That's what.
Do you recall the interesting thing you said?
No, you made a point about fatigue and you said if.
If this answer doesn't make sense to you, go and revise the definitions of fatigue.
Do you remember what that?
I do.
I do remember writing that I, I, I think I was drawing attention to the fact that fatigue strictly
is an outcome.
So.
But was it in the context of Pat?
I can't quite remember what the question was in the context of because it applies.
Yes, it was in the context of Pat, so yeah.
So if, if yes exactly, I remember now.
So basically I was thinking about this exact same study because it's just been, it's been kind of
swimming around in my head quite a lot in the last couple of days.
Basically, if you see a performance goes down, then you are fatigued.
Now you may not feel fatigued, you know, you may not think there's any fatigue present, but if there
is a reduction in performance, that is the definition of fatigue.
Similarly, if I see an increase in performance, then I am potentiated.
Now I may not feel potentiated, I feel fatigued, it doesn't matter, but I've increased performance,
therefore I'm potentiated.
I'm not fatigued.
So if I do multiple sets or multiple efforts and I see a either maintenance or performance or an
increase in performance, then I'm not fatigued.
But I can still experience fatigue mechanisms that have been equalled out or actually overcome by
potentiation mechanisms.
So this is the problem that we have in exercise science.
Fatigue and potentiation are literally just telling you what the outcome is.
Is it increase in performance or is it a decrease in performance?
You can have reductions in motine recruitment, which is superspinal CNS fatigue, even though you
have an increase in performance from potentiation.
And this is one of those things where I say you have to revise your terminology and understand what
you're saying.
This is not contradictory.
This is actually just following the terminology.
You may go, oh, no, I don't think that's what fatigue is.
I'm like, I don't care because this is how it works in the entirety of the petite literature and
that's more important than your opinion.
So basically the entirety of the petite literature treats fatigue is an outcome which is a temporary
reversible reduction exercise performance.
If you have a temporary and reversible exercise performance reduction and yet there is a
potentiation mechanism happening, you're not potentiated, but there is a PAP effect.
It's just it's a mechanism.
It's not an actual observation, an outcome change converse that you can have an increased points
from potentiation, but actually a reduction in motion recruitment because you've got the superspinal
fatigue present.
And that's what we actually see quite a lot, as I say in the in the kind of PAP literature is if you
actually go looking for it, you'll find that recruitment always just goes down and down and down and
down and down over a sequence of efforts, whatever they may be.
So superspinal fatigue is always happening and it's always kind of present.
You may not see a relaxing performance, but it is still happening.
So translation there for anyone who got lost is if you did multiple sets.
Down excitement on my ability to explain.
Something, I mean, some people may not even know what PEP stands for, right?
So what we're saying there is if you're doing multiple sets, in that second set you could perform
better, but there could be less hypertrophy stimulus.
Correct, because your potentiation is happening as a as a increase in the mechanical tension of
individual muscle fibers, but your recruitment is determining how many muscle fibers are activated.
I actually got this question again recently, which shows that there are actually new people coming
to my Instagram page and think, I can't imagine what that must be like.
You know, you kind of navigate to some kind of random Instagram page and you realize there's 2 1/2
thousand infographics and reading one of them makes it a headache.
And it's like, OK, this guy is a little bit out there.
So like the difference between mechanical retention and motor unit recruitment.
Mechanical tension refers to single fibre force.
So a fibre needs to experience that force in order to be stimulated, to grow.
Recruitment just tells you how many fibres are activated.
And this actually goes hand in hand with a whole bunch of other criticisms that people give me about
EMG and misunderstanding how near I'm going to come at you.
So they'll go, oh, EMG is irrelevant because it can't predict hypertry.
And I'm like, I know straight away what paper they're referring to because I was a co-author on that
paper.
I'm like, OK, you know, kind of throwing papers that I was part of like whatever.
And they go like, you know, EMG is irrelevant.
And I'm like, well, no, it's not because EMG is giving you an idea of just how many fibres are
activated in that particular contraction.
And you can't create a stimulus fibre to be in a fibre unless it's activated at least, you know,
kind of that's how we think things work.
So ultimately EMG is telling you again, more about your kind of long term kind of capacity for what
your ceiling is going to be.
Because if you can't activate a fibre in a particular exercise, it's never going to grow no matter
what you do.
But you could get this like with a perfect, you can get high kind of mechanical tension stimulus on
single fibers.
Okay, fine.
Yeah, they're going to grow faster.
But again, you're not going to grow any dealer fibers.
So you're going to see that kind of kind of trade off between what's diminished pride per fiber and
fibers have a Max kind of limit on them in terms of how much they'll grow according to the size
Prince.
So it's tried to muscle.
So you're better off trying to hit more fibres and grow more each fibre more slowly than you are
trying to hit, you know, single fibres harder and then hit a ceiling and not get anywhere.
You know, And I would actually say that one of the biggest kind of complaints, if you like, of the
of the community of people who are lifting is that they get stuck.
Yeah.
Like I'm getting I can't grow.
And why is that?
Why am I plateauing?
And I'm like, well, I can think of 17 different things that you could.
Be doing we're doing 2 full modules and that aren't we in the webinar series?
Well, exactly.
I mean, it's like this is the single thing that people complain about.
They call themselves hard gainers or they just say they hit a plateau or they're really struggling
to make progress.
And I'm like, I'm pretty confident that you're probably making a mistake around your excise
selection not being broad enough, so you're not covering enough fibres or you're doing too much
fatiguing stuff and you're ending up either within session, like 2 short rest periods or post
session, you're kind of damaged.
And most damage when you arrive at the next worker.
You're doing something wrong most likely with the way that you're programming.
And it's causing you to end up not being able to push into your kind of last chunk komoto units.
And it's very, very obviously obvious how the Physiology works here.
And it is, as I say, the biggest complaint people have.
But they all want to push back and they all want to go no, no, no, no.
I just want to do, you know, a bunch of sets for one exercise a couple of times a week and like,
well, OK, problem.
Then the need to plan or whatever it's called, you know, your lower frequency, both of those errors
you're making, which have absolutely no physiological justification behind them.
As we just explained today, there is no scenario in which doing one exercise for multiple sets, you
know, kind of and then changing your exercises across the week instead of within the session.
There's no scenario in which those things are going to work well for you is a long term strategy for
muscle growth.
And there's no physiological way to argue that they're better either.
People who are arguing against them just kind of, you know, pick a couple of outcome studies and
then use rhetoric.
There's there's no analysis of how the Physiology is happening.
So this entire conversation, if we're talking about upper lower compared to full body twice a week,
or you know, what you've just talked about there, I think really there's if we look at lifter in
their lifting journey, some of these issues are going to become more significant as they get more
advanced in the lifting journey.
And I think there's going to be trade-offs to both.
Like if we're talking about, and obviously this podcast has been about two times a week frequency,
But if we include three times a week frequency in there as well, and we're talking about, you know,
higher variety of of exercises and multi sets versus single sets.
If you're an advanced lifter, the things that are going to stop you are Hindi, you continue to
progress, are not going to be the things that are impacting the the speed or the rate of progress.
The problem is the stealing.
A problem is the stealing exactly.
And that that's important because it means that you've got a shift of focus as you become more
advanced lifter.
You've got to stop thinking about chasing quick fixes and trying to grow things quickly.
And you're going to start thinking, what's my capacity limitation here?
What, what fibers am I not training?
And you know, how am I allowing fatigue to interfere with my MOTI and recruitment levels?
Everything, everything as advanced lifter is going to come down to how can I increase recruitment
levels and how can I increase the number of fibers that I'm training?
And that's why for my advanced lifters, I'm now saying we're just not going to do consecutive days,
we're gonna have this day.
And again, this is a problem that I don't think is as big or as important for a beginning lifter or
even an intermediate lifter.
Sure.
Doing up and lower the consecutive days or doing your consolidated plan with multi sets of single
exercise.
So I think 1 needs to.
And that doesn't mean that those other options are better for an inexperienced lifter, right?
But I do think 1 needs to be honest about where are they at in their lifting journey and can you get
away with this?
And if you enjoy it and you can get away with it, go for gold.
And I think at some point you're not going to.
Stop testing there because you know, basically I I would say one of the most common questions that I
just ignore because I mean, how am I supposed to answer it?
Well, most common questions I get is some variation on I've been doing, you know, XYZ and now I'm
plateaued.
How can you kind of help me now fix it?
And I'm like, well, I can't without lots of other information.
But you, you know, really if you are in that scenario, if you're one of these people who messages me
or anybody else saying I'm plateaued, how do I fix it?
The answer is almost certainly that you've got to shift your focus.
You've arrived, I'm assuming this, you've made a training, you've arrived at a point now where
you've got to shift your focus from rate of growth to ceiling of growth.
That's what you've got to do.
You've got to fundamentally shift your mindset from how can I grow as fast as I can to how can I
actually find a way to expand the number of fibres that are growing and expand, you know, the level
of recruitment that I can reach on any given effort that I put in.
And that means avoiding back-to-back sessions.
It means, you know, kind of avoiding all the other kind of stupid fatiguing stuff that people do
like, you know, drop sets and high reps and short rest periods and things like that.
But, you know, fundamentally means also a better exercise selection, things that actually fit
together and doing those exercises multiple times per week.
Just doing more exercise selection and saying, I'm going to do, oh, this exercise on Monday and
another exercise on Wednesday.
And that's my 2X, my 2 * a week I'm training not.
You can't make these kind of mistakes at this point.
Cannot make those mistakes.
When you're at the point when you're trying to push through plateaus, you've got to have, you know
your exercise selection is going to be dialled in, the frequency of that exercise selection is going
to be dialled in and avoiding fatigue has got to be dialled in.
And then you've got to nail those things down.
And then, you know, if you're still not making progress at that point, then you know there's
potentially A consultancy worth having.
But ultimately, you can't be making these mistakes at this point.
Well, what I think is so interesting about this part of this conversation is that not just you
shifting your focus, but you're actually probably going to sacrifice rate of progress.
And that's a really significant shift to make.
And that's like, this is the first time I'm actually verbalizing this shift that I've made because I
used to always try to be like, OK, how much volume can I do?
How often can I be in the gym?
I wanna do as much volume as often as possible in the gym and I want to go to failure.
I do remember.
Yes.
And and so I've a sort of, you know, subconsciously come to this realization that actually, no, I'm
doing things that I know mean there could be some atrophy occurring.
You know, if I'm doing upper, upper day off, lower day off, upper day off, I know that there's going
to be some atrophy occurring between those workouts.
I know that it's not best for speed of progress, but in the long run, I think I'm at a point where I
need to do that.
And so I think that conversation is really interesting to realize, hey, there's a sacrifice here and
it doesn't need to be right.
Someone could do full body any other day.
You can still make this work, but depending on what your context.
Is they would probably because they've they've gone from doing three sets of bench to doing a bench,
you know, kind of maybe some incline and something else.
You know, they're starting to that was a bad example.
A better example would be kind of, you know, maybe going from seated leg curl to doing seated leg
curl plus line leg curl, plus, you know, 45 P back extension you're in from seated leg curl, which
is kind of by mice, the staple hamstrings exercise for anybody who's not an advanced lifter.
Then basically you're going from that three sets three times a week or whatever.
Now you're going to do that one set once time three times a week, and you're going to do a line leg
curl one set three times a week and a 45 year back extension 1 set three times a week.
So yeah, you're going to find that whatever fibers were specifically targeting with your seated Lego
are now going to grow more slowly.
And they were previous because you're doing a lot less sporting, but you're now expanding the number
of fibres that you're training with that hamstrings part of your workout.
You are going to hit a higher plateau limit than you would have done in terms of muscle mass than
you would have done just sticking with the same exercise.
And then you might get to a point where actually doing all that in a single workout is causing too
much within session fatigue.
And so now maybe you go to an AB full body where maybe you do a lying like girl one day and you do a
seated and then you do the back extension.
And so again you are sacrificing rate of.
Growth.
In those fibers.
You needed to do that because your recruitment levels were starting to drop because of the within
session fatigue you're experiencing.
So yeah, this is going to be the natural progression that you end up having to take is that your
rate of progress is going to slow as you sacrifice volume per session and potentially even a little
bit of frequency if you have to.
So yeah, you can end up much more slowly progressing much more slowly, but your ultimate ceiling is
going to be high.
And that's, and I think that's why I think Physiology matters in this the context, because you have
to understand that the nature of the quest is changing as you hit those plateaus more and more
frequently.
Because literally you could look at those two plans and someone could be like, which one, Which one
will I grow fast on?
And you'd be like, not that one.
Like this advanced plane I've just written for you is not the one someone's going to grow quickest
on, but it's going to be best at this point in time.
So yeah.
And unless you know why, unless you know the physiological principles as to why that's the case,
which planning to go with, you're going to get the plan that's going to yield the quickest results.
Yeah, yeah.
Which is obviously why people promote them.
You know, you know, that's just kind of they know that their clients will get a fast kind of rate to
progress initially.
I mean, then they don't have to pick up the pieces.
And then and then they're going to come over to a plan like mine in two years time.
Exactly.
I think we've gone down all kinds of adjacent pause with this episode, but is there anything else to
conclude with when it comes to comparing Apple lower twice a week with full body twice a week?
No, I'm good with that I think.
Yeah, I as I say, just repeating what I said earlier, if if the exercises in both workouts or both
or both lower body workouts in the case of the upper lowest.
But if they're the same, then both programs will probably work reasonably well for most people most
of the time.
So as long as you're not doing separate exercises on different upper body sessions or different
lower body sessions or you know, different full body sessions, then both options up lower and full
body twice a week, they're both going to work well.
And we had an example and the one that you presented us with from Chuck Sipes and I actually quite
like it.
They're just not ideal.
They're just, they're just not ideal.
You're going to get better results long term if you can train full body three times a week,
especially if you get the advanced level where you're going to do full body AB, AB, because then you
load more kind of exercise variety.
You really don't be able to push kind of all of your exercises really well in every single workout.
You're not kind of trying to cram a million things into a single session, but fundamentally they are
going to work.
So when people say to me, you said upper, lower kind of four times a week doesn't work.
No, I didn't say that it does work.
It's just not as good as doing something like, you know, for body three times a week or you know,
even as you say with more advanced people, 4, three times a week, A/B, A/B, A/B.
So is that important thing?
And really I want to kind of say at the end is that, you know, there is a difference.
What we've got to do is understand there's a range of options and some are better than others.
It's not that there are two categories and one is the category of things that don't work and the
other is the category of things that do work.
Everything really, with a few exceptions like body parts splits with low muscle training volumes and
and frequencies per week, yeah, that doesn't work.
But pretty much everything else will work, but certain things will stop working earlier than others.
Yeah.
And we didn't touch on it, but even in the case of someone who's an enhanced lifter, because you
grant three of those different variables before, OK, maybe the atrophy might be lower in someone
who's who's enhanced, but they're still going to have the issue of the diminishing returns of
volume.
They're still going to be the same.
Even if the magnitude is lower, there's still going to be a benefit to this high frequency, more
exercise variety, like all these things are the same.
Everything we've talked about, it's simply maybe the magnitude to be slightly less in that case.
So regardless if you're enhanced, you're natural, all these variables still apply.
Yeah.
I mean, I keep going back to that animal model study that you actually were the first to identify
which had an animal, I think it was a rabbit.
They were rabbits with exogenous testosterone and they immobilised one of the one of the limbs of
the rabbit.
And basically they then tested immobilized and non immobilized limbs in terms of muscle size,
obviously.
Well not obviously maybe to some people, but the exogenous testals actually caused both limbs to
grow.
So this is an immobilized limb where you expect massive atrophy to be happening and actually caused
both limbs to grow, both the immobilized and the non immobilized.
But the non immobilized limb actually grew more than the immobilized limb.
What that shows you is that the excised stimulus, the embolic stimulus are actually separate.
Fundamentally you're adding them together in the case of the non immobilised limb and in the
immobilised limb you're basically one is negating the other, but you still end up net positive
because the anabolic.
So I think really that's kind of then it means that we're in a slightly confusing situation with
users because what it means is that they're always going to be growing.
It's just that they're muscle fibres that they're training and then grow faster, that's all.
Yeah.
So the variables we talked about still matter.
So the variables is still, yeah, still applies, just there will be a point arguably when exercise
isn't really doing anything.
I mean it.
Depends.
Yeah, Once you've maximized your growth of the exercise, you sort of get this additional stimulus.
Yeah, totally.
Probably getting to a point where you look at some of the highest level kind of professional.
Whatever it is, it's quite likely that exercise isn't actually doing anything.
Well, but it's still necessary to maintain what exercise what you prefers.
Agreed, agreed, agreed.
Absolutely.
It's just the any changes?
Are probably going to be sugar.
It's not going to.
Be a pharmacy to come side probably I'm I'm I'm just kind of trying to figure out my own head
really.
This is kind of part of my journey to understand a little bit more about the anabolic side.
I don't really have a a reliable model at the moment and that's not entirely my fault.
It's just the like literature really.
But there we go.
So.
Yeah.
And this is a topic we get a lot of questions on as well.
And you know, we've actually talked about getting some guests on the podcast to talk.
Yeah, we.
Should do that.
You should do that.
It's just as I say, you know, at the end of the day, my skill set is parsing the literature, and to
the extent that the literature doesn't exist, I can't pause it.
OK, I think that's it for today.
Thank you guys for joining us.
Don't forget to jump on and submit your e-mail to our pre launch offer link.
And we'll be back next week with a new topic and a new episode.