Episode: 052 Resting 2-3 minutes between sets isn't "optimal"
URL: https://open.spotify.com/episode/6cmMmubkgRtt9bInAaiHM4
Published: 2026-05-18
================================================================================

Hello, thank you for joining us for another episode of Hypertrophy Past and present.
Chris, how are you doing today?
I'm doing well.
Thanks, Jake.
Although this is the second podcast that I've recorded, so I'm definitely in that professional
podcaster zone at the.
Moment.
There you go.
I didn't even know that.
There we go.
We just talked for an hour and you didn't even tell me that you've done another podcast today.
To be fair, a large chunk of that talk was trying to figure out how on earth we're going to explain
the routine that you've got to show us today.
Yeah, that's true.
And we kind of got to the end of the conversation saying it doesn't matter as long as you guys are
going to get the idea, you'll know exactly why it doesn't matter in a few moments time.
So today's episode is kind of in part an extension to last week's episode.
So last week we covered drop sets and we talked about how they kind of were done in this not called
drop set way, but what is effectively a drop set in the silver era.
And we've done really intelligently, to be honest.
Not that we're saying everyone should go out and do them, but it did make a lot of sense the way
that they were being programmed.
Now, off the back of that episode, there's been a lot of conversation, questions, confusion, ground,
kind of why they would work, how these rest periods work.
Shouldn't we just do longer rest periods?
Where is it better than doing longer rest periods?
And people kind of not really understand you having a lot of questions over how this rest period
thing kind of works.
And I think that's fair enough because ultimately what we're doing is playing with different types
of fatigue and fatigue mechanisms.
And, and that will shift kind of what that rest period is or isn't doing.
And it's, it's confusing to, to hear people say, well, long rest periods are always better, but
clusters can kind of work and drop sets can kind of work.
And it seems paradoxical.
So we're gonna talk a little bit more about rest periods specifically today.
And it's a conversation I'm actually really excited to be having because I actually think it's a
topic that is not just misunderstood, but I actually think the general recommendation is not a good
recommendation in most cases.
It's one of those ones where I feel like the recommendation is kind of, let's just give like a, a,
you know, a middle ground recommendation.
And it kind of doesn't work for anything.
And I think you really we should be pushing it one way or the other.
And what people are genuinely saying doesn't make sense.
So we'll jump into that.
But before we do, I have a have a workout routine for you.
So bear with me.
This is gonna be a challenge in and of itself.
This is Serge Noubray.
Now, he was a bodybuilder.
Obviously he he started competing right at the tail end of the silver era.
But then he won his titles and and you know, Mr. Universe in in the mid to late 70s.
So you know, well and truly into the golden era.
I think we can, you know, fairly confidently say that he was enhanced.
I don't know if he ever talked about Anabolic Goose, but obviously competing at a time where that
was rife.
Now, I'm not gonna go into more detail about Surge.
You're welcome to look him up if you would like, but this was one of his routines, which I think he
called it faster paced training.
I don't know.
I don't know that's the term he coined or just what it was referred to.
But essentially between these sets he was taking very, very, very short dress periods.
We're talking some in the grounds of like 15 to 30 seconds and just smashing out these sets.
Now this routine was done 6 days per week, so it is a a three-way split and then repeated.
But he was actually training multiple times per day as well.
So I'll explain that as we go.
Now probably speaking, assume that every exercise I mention was done for five to 10 sets and there
are some exceptions to that which I will mention.
But if I don't say how many sets they were done usually for five to 10 sets of 15 repetitions.
OK, so we're talking tremendous amounts of volume here.
So day one we have and these first exercise is actually done for 15 sets.
OK, So we've got leg extension and leg curl, 15 sets each.
Then we go into a hack squat again, we're dropping down to our standard 5 to 10 sets, standing calf
ferries, seated calf ferries, donkey calf ferries and then we finished with up to 2000 sit ups,
suggesting that this is his AM workout and we've already got 60 plus sets.
Now that's not it for day one.
He then laid on in the mid morning, did shoulders and he did 10 sets of behind the neck barbell
dress and they did lying one arm dumbbell latch rays and standing dumbbell latch rays both for 10
sets each.
So we've got another thirty sets.
We're up to about, I don't know, 90 sets or so now for day one.
And then in the evening we're not done yet.
We've got chess and we've got 20 to 30 sets of bench and then we've got straight arm pullover and
then dumbbell flies.
So we're concluding with what are we now 121 thirty sets?
They're bouts for day one and then day 2 we have standing calf raise.
We did calves yesterday, don't forget, but we're gonna do them again.
We got St. standing calf raise, seated calf raise and donkey calf raise each for five sets and doing
ABS again for another 2000 or so sit ups.
Now day 2, we've only got one more installment.
So we only had a two party here.
And in the evening we've got 12 sets of unwrap for chin ups.
And then we've got lap pull down for 12 sets and a reverse grip pull down for another eight sets or
so.
So what are we 203045 and a bit over 45 sets for day 2.
So nothing really compared to to day one.
And then our last workout in this this little cycle is we have we start with our sit ups.
So again, give or take 2000 sit ups and then we've got arms.
Now for the arms, it was a barbell curl and a line triceps extension.
I think he did these as a superset.
I think they're five sets each.
And then a dumbbell concentr concentration curl with a cable push down for five sets each.
So what 10 sets triceps, 10 sets biceps, 20 sets in total.
You know, it almost seems reasonable in contrast to everything else.
So that third day was only, what was that?
2020 sets in total, 21 sets or however many sets he did for his, his, his sit ups.
And then he would repeat that and start again the next day and he had one day off.
But you know this, this little cycle was repeated twice per week.
So I don't know if anyone listening has given this workout routine a go.
If you have, please message me, drop me a message in on Insta and let me know how long you did it
for and what your results were like and if you're bed bound now for the rest of your life.
But I'd be interested here.
OK, Chris, I'll unleash you.
Unmute yourself.
What do you think?
So I've got all kinds of things floating around in my head right now about this.
I mean, obviously I'm not going to deconstruct it because that would just be silly.
I mean, it's so far away from anything that, you know, we would see physiologically as sensible and
also in line with silver era training that it's quite clearly, you know, just completely insane.
But equally it's really interesting because I think that it's probably more volume than even the
most committed devotees of high volume training today would actually go for.
So this is really interesting.
So I think that if somebody is running around at the moment saying, oh, you know, I think high
volume is the answer and you know, it's just random.
The fact that people trained in a different way with much lower volumes before the introduction of
anabolics, then I would be really tempted to give them this routine and say, well if you think high
volume is the best way to achieve gains then why don't you do this programme?
Here you go.
It shouldn't for you.
It's already right there.
Just go for it, you know, and just stand back and and see what happens.
But yeah, I mean, like, jokes aside, it is, you know, quite clearly a very good example of a routine
that only really appeared after the introduction of anabolic steroids.
So basically from the dawn of time to, you know, like 19501955, everybody trained with much lower
volumes, you know, and they weren't dividing their workouts out into different sections and doing
different things on different days.
They were basically just doing the same workout pretty much more or less three times a week.
And then suddenly when anabolics get introduced, we get this completely different approach to
training, which has got absolutely insane amounts of volume.
And also in the context of what we're talking about, much shorter rest periods.
So generally speaking in the Silver era, much longer rest periods, what we've got here, obviously
much, much shorter rests and you actually need it because you physically won't get through the
things in the time.
You won't get.
You won't finish before your next work out.
Yeah, I think that's probably accurate.
I mean, you actually have to kind of treat this as an endurance sport really to get through the
repetitions.
Yeah.
So really when I look at this, it almost doesn't look like strength training because you have to use
such short rest periods and you'd have to reduce the the actual load so much that it would be kind
of sort of very far removed from what we would expect to be normal strength training weights, I
think especially in somebody of this level of strength.
So, yeah, not really.
I don't, I don't really want to go any further and start deconstructing the program and say, oh,
like the excise selection was different or because it's just, it's just mad.
I mean.
It's yeah, you think makes sense.
So obviously the fact that he is actually still training every muscle group more than once a week.
Is.
Indicator is an indicator that he is still drawing on that silver era kind of model.
I mean, if he'd been really kind of separating everything out and doing a full kind of body part
split across the week, I think he would have tipped over into the next era of bodybuilding
practices.
But yeah, I mean, we've still got two days a week I've been chuckling about.
Actually, I've been chuckling a little bit about two days versus 3 days and one day again, because
it keeps coming around.
Everyone wants to talk about frequency all the time at the moment.
And so every so often somebody will have another go and say, oh, there's no evidence about this or
there's no evidence about that or whatever the buzzword is for the day.
And I'm like, you know, there isn't any evidence for two times a week that is better than one time a
week.
So if you really want to pin your kind of colours to that 2 * a week mast, you, you are going to be
struggling because at least on the evidence based side of things, if that's where you want to go and
there isn't really any way you can, you can point to and say, and this study clearly shows that 2 is
then one.
I'm like, well, you know, not sure it does show that to be honest.
It very much feels like just hedging their bets, doesn't it?
It's like, well, I don't, I don't honestly believe one time is just as good and I don't want to do 3
times.
So I'm just going to kind of say that this middle ground is what's best, which I feel is the most
disingenuous part of the argument because people are saying it is best.
Yeah, I know.
And it's, it's there's, there's just nothing out there.
The only the only the only kind of data point that people can really sort of to identify is the
Courier sort of analysis of multiple studies.
It's not a true meta analysis.
And and that really was sort of aggregating data in a way that, as I said before, I don't really
think is valid.
There isn't actually a single long term training study that shows that to put them on.
So you can't really kind of argue that too is the kind of the panacea, the best thing to do because
it just hasn't got any evidence to to support that.
So and then of course what you then have to do is start of analysing things mechanistically, in
which case you end up in my model.
And then if it comes three times or 3 1/2 * a week anyway.
But yeah, so I was chuckling a little bit about this, this kind of two times a week because that
seems to be recirculating.
But yeah, we have here a higher frequency than we do in other kind of sort of maybe golden era or
later programs.
So that is, that is cool.
I don't have sort of anything particularly interesting to say about excise selection.
It's not horrible and it's not amazing.
You know, it's obviously making use of the fact that the machines exist, which is a huge advantage.
But more than that, I don't think it's, you know, anything particularly special.
I do think it's interesting that in almost every muscle group here they he still has at least two
exercises per muscle.
Yeah, that's fair.
Yeah.
And generally they're like the exercise section is not awful.
Like it's usually kind of different enough within those exercises.
Yeah.
Like for me, if I had to take these exercises, even if I had to keep them on the same days that he
has them just.
Use it all down to single sets or two.
Sets.
If you like, you can sort them up as an OK program.
Yeah, you're right.
Yeah, I guess I'm just being a little bit hard because of just the sheer insanity of the calf
raises.
I mean, it's just how many calf raises variations do you want?
But you know, other than that, yeah, you're right, It is, it is relatively, it's relatively sensible
exercise selection.
But again, as I say, a lot of that just comes from the fact that we've got, you know, the machines
to be able to do that.
So, you know, you've got knee extensions and leg curls and suddenly your life becomes a lot easier.
You've now got to train those two joint muscles without difficulty.
Yeah.
And yeah, you know, to be fair, back exercises are good.
He's got behind the neck pull down, which is going to give him pretty wide grip, so he's going to be
definitely in the front of plane, you know.
So yeah, he's got wide and probably now pulling in now, which is all you really want.
I don't think there's any shrubbing in here, but you know, if you're using anabolics and you
probably wouldn't need to do shrugs.
Yeah, goodness.
I just wonder 2015 to 30 sets for some of these exercises, like bench, 30 sets of bench with 15
repetitions.
Surely 1 would be just using the bar at the end.
And if he's got 30 seconds, 20 seconds between sets, goodness me.
I don't know if there's video footage of Surge doing these workouts.
I'll have to look, but I would just be shocked if he was doing any appreciable load at all.
And I think it, yeah, but again, I think it would depend a little bit on on the individual.
I mean, some people are going to be much more able to withstand and maintain reps over multiple sets
than other people.
But yeah, yeah, I would be completely cooked.
I would just be, I would be upset.
I wouldn't even be moving the bar.
I'd be I'd be needing to use a broomstick.
You wouldn't, wouldn't be able to unjack it.
OK.
So last week we, we did dive a little bit into some of these different fatigue mechanisms that are
occurring within a workout when we were talking about drop sets.
But we'll give a little bit of a refresher here.
I assume that's where we're going to move on to now.
Rest periods?
Yeah, let's do it.
That's your.
That's your cue to tell us about.
I will do that.
So yeah, basically if we start at the beginning, when we're doing strength training sets and we're
taking rest periods between sets, then what's happening is that fatigue mechanisms are building up
during the set itself, and then those fatigue mechanisms are then dissipating in that following rest
period.
So if we take a very long rest period, then what we're doing is we're allowing all the team
mechanisms to dissipate before we start the next set.
If we take a shorter rest period, then we're allowing those team mechanisms to remain when we
obviously do start the next set.
Now, the important thing to remember is that fatigue is the objective measurement outcome.
So we get a reduction in the number of reps.
So if you go from set one, set two to set 3 and you see a reduction in reps of, I don't know, couple
of reps on the 1st to the second, another couple of reps on the 2nd to the 3rd, the objective
reduction in performance.
You could, if you wanted to, you could actually count it as number of reps lost.
So you don't have to say fatigue is a potent percentage loss in strength or a percentage loss in
whatever.
You could just say it is this many reps lost or you know, on average I lose 2.3 repetitions.
That is a totally valid way of measuring your fatigue.
If you want to do that, all it has to be is an objective external measurement.
And it doesn't have to be percentage terms.
It could be, as I say, just Rep number terms, but the fatigue mechanisms are under the surface.
Now, generally speaking, what you've got are mechanisms of fatigue that will dissipate quickly and
mechanisms of fatigue that will dissipate slightly more slowly.
So what you can find is that if you finish a strength training set and then leave a short risk
period, you're more likely to have a larger number of different fatigue mechanisms still present in
comparison with if you leave a longer rest period.
And if you leave a long enough rest period, then really the only thing that can possibly be left
over that point is sort of your calcium.
I'm related to fatigue, which in the context of a single workout will pretty much just be
excitation, contraction, coupling failure won't really be anything else.
In the context of a single workout, not, not usually.
So basically what we can do is we can look at a strength training set, we can say, OK, what fatigue
mechanisms are actually occurring and then how quickly do they dissipate.
And then if I start my next set before some of them have finished dissipating, then you know, what's
the effect going to be.
So generally speaking, when we look at strength training sets, we divide the fatigue mechanisms up
into firstly 2 categories being central and peripheral.
So central nervous system fatigue mechanisms and peripheral mechanisms.
And then we further divide those into another two categories each.
So in the central node system, you've got supraspinal and spinal and then in the periphery you've
got metabolite related and calcium I related.
OK.
In terms of the CNS, when we talk about superspinal and spinal, superspinal obviously means above
the level of the spine.
So it happens in the brain.
The brain mechanisms of fatigue are just governed by the psycho biological model of fatigue.
So basically it just says that if you can feel a sensation which is negative, it contributes to your
perception of effort.
And that means that you're going to hit your maximum tolerable perception of effort at a lower level
of motive improvement than you would do if you didn't have those sensations present.
So if I do a strength training set, and the classic example is that I get out of breath.
So if I get out of breath and I'm still out of breath and feeling those negative sensations in my
body as I get to the start of my second set.
I am not going to achieve as high a number of reps in my second set as I would do in the first set.
Simply because I'm adding on that additional discomforting sensation of feeling out of breath to my
second set.
And therefore I'm hitting my maximum tolerable perception of effort earlier than I would do or at a
lower level of centimeter command than I would do in a another situation without that sensation
being present.
So that's a classic example of superspinal synthesity.
OK from other things as.
Well, on that, on that people are, I don't know if you've seen a lot of people are saying, Oh, no,
it's not actually about perception of effort anymore, but we're wrong about that all along or you're
wrong about that.
And and it's this this sort of push of this narrative that there's actually no research that
supports that and it's all peripheral fatigue, is there?
Do you want to say anything to that, or is that a whole can of worms?
It's not really a kind of worms, it's just that's people dismissing research that they haven't read.
I mean, there is a large amount of research showing that we hit maximum sorry that we we arrive at
muscular failure without hitting maximum levels of motino recruitment.
I mean, this actually goes back a very long way.
I mean, I've got, I was actually just looking at some very early research just kind of over the
weekend where they were trying to extrapolate to figure out exactly where the true levels of kind of
maximum muscle force really are.
Because it depends on how you approach the extrapolation.
As we increase motoring equipment, increase force production, they generally go pretty, pretty
linearly.
But as you approach the top end, it starts to bend a little bit.
So you start to get a little bit of a difference.
But fundamentally there is, I mean you can literally pick almost any voluntary activation study
that's ever been done and you'll see that somebody is sitting in a dynamometer with, and we've been
through this before.
I mean they're sitting in the dynamometer and they sit in the dynamometer and you've got maximum
levels of stability because you're strapped in.
I mean it is above and beyond what you're going to get in a machine exercise in the gym.
So you're totally strapped in.
You're using a single joint and a single limb exercise.
So it's usually either elbow flexion or it's an extension and you're strapped in and you're only
using 1 limb and it's single joint.
And even in that scenario you're pushing as hard as you can for three seconds.
Even in that scenario, you've still got a gap between what you're actually capable of physically
exerting with your maximum effort and what your muscle is capable of doing if you give it a little
bit of help with some extra electrical stimulation.
So that tells you that there are muscle fibres that are not being used.
And in the case of the force deficit that you're going to see in untrained people, it's going to be
like 20% in the case of quadriceps.
Now this really important to realise that that 20% is a force deficit.
So what we're saying is that if I electrically stimulate a little bit more of the muscle, then I'm
going to get potentially theoretically another 20% to force output.
But the important thing to realise is that that 20% is being created by muscle fibers that aren't
hypertrophied, you know, so the reality is you're massively underestimating what that could really
do.
If you could hypertrophy those 2020%, they are fast reach fibers, they're potentially going to be
really big.
You could get way more than that.
So the reality is you're comparing your 80% is hypertrophied fibers.
Now, sure, at the bottom end, they're highly oxidative.
So they're not very big.
And that's that's by the by.
But I'm saying is you could actually get a lot more out of that top bit the most if you're capable
of actually growing those fibers.
So you're not really comparing like we'd like.
So again, we must be underestimating.
So if you want to extrapolate that scenario and say, you know, OK, what would the voluntary
activation deficit look like in a strength training exercise in the gym?
Well, straight away you're not doing, you're not doing fully stable situations because you're not
strapped in, you're not doing kind of single joint, single limb stuff most of the time.
So straight away your voluntary activation deficit is going to jump much, much bigger.
You're going to not be able to activate a lot more fibres than you would do in that compared to that
dynamometry situation.
So, you know, the reality is that the simple existence of the dynamometry research and then
extrapolating that to strengthening context tells you that not only is your voluntary activation
deficit absolutely there, which means that you must be hitting failure for another reason, not a
peripheral reason or not only that is true, but it's actually going to be even bigger than what you
see happening in the literature because we would expect lack of stability and using more muscle mass
to create larger amounts of monetary activation deficits than we actually see in the in the
dynamometry literature.
So honestly, I think the first hurdle that people need to cross if they want to argue that muscular
failure is entirely A peripheral concept, they need to cross the observation that in the dynamometry
literature there are huge voluntary activation deficits.
That's the first hurdle they need to cross.
The next hurdle need to cross is that, you know, we would expect the voluntary activation deficits
to be even bigger in the context of strength training than they are in the dynamometry literature.
So even if you're seeing like a couple of percent for a biceps curl in a dynamometry situation, it's
going to be bigger than a couple of percent in the strength training situation straightaway.
But as I say, in the lower body muscles, the bigger muscles, it's way bigger than that anyway.
Yeah.
And I don't think that there would have a way of explaining away motivation as well the fact that.
Then you've got all the stuff where you can instantaneously increase performance.
So if I'm, if somebody's doing a strength training set, and I mean, I've given this example 100
times, but if I'm standing, you know, behind the leg press and I jump out with a kind of fistful of
dollars, I say, you know, get an extra Rep and I'll give you all of this money.
You know, somebody is going to find the motivation to get that extra repetition.
I mean, you can do it in another situation.
I'm just giving a, an amusing example, but you know, you can give somebody motivation and they're
instantaneous to be able to hit higher levels of repetition, high numbers of repetitions.
Well, if peripheral fatigue is the only thing that is making a difference, how did you get that
extra repetition?
It's not possible.
And it's not just, you know, kind of those kind of motivations.
You can do motivation in a whole bunch of different ways.
You can have motivation, you know, like I just provided an example there.
You can have just people shouting encouragement.
You can have sort of social facilitation, which is where you have like people around just
presenting, you know, a kind of a group around you while you're doing some work.
That generally tends to motivate people, you know, and you can have a goal orientation of motivation
where you kind of like maybe have a graph on a computer where they can see what level their forces
output AT and they can try and beat the number that they got last time.
I mean, there's all kinds of different ways that you can, I mean, you can do that as a logbook based
approach as well.
But the whole point is that all of those, those kind of motivational queues instantaneously change
the number of reps that we can do.
And the other side also is true.
So like what we just talked about there is changing your maximum tolerable protection of effort by
directly increasing, um, your tolerance to discomfort.
Basically what you're saying is I'm only normally prepared to sorry, this level of discomfort, but
if I were to be motivated, then I would increase the amount of effort that I'm prepared to tolerate.
And then suddenly you increase the number of reps you can do because you can increase the level of
motive equipment that you, that you can create.
But equally, even if you keep motive not rotating equipment, even if you keep the maximum tolerable
production at the same, if you've got any negative sensations and you remove those, then
instantaneously you then create an increase in the number of ropes you can do because you're
relieving some of that negative sensation.
And the classic example of that course is cob mouth rinsing.
So if somebody is doing a workout and they haven't, you know, consumed carbs in the immediate kind
of vicinity of that workout, and you ask them just to swirl some kind of sugary drink around and
then spit it out instantaneously, they can now do more reps than they would be able to do if you
hadn't given them that sugary drink, even though they haven't consumed any of it.
So there's no fuel change.
It's literally just the brain going, oh, right, OK, we've got some extra fuel there.
So I can be a bit more relaxed on the whole kind of fearing the loss of, you know, fuel inside the
body.
So I, I can dial back on the sensation, which is our input for telling us that we are running out of
fuel.
If I take that away, because I know that I've probably got some fuel coming in from somewhere else,
then I can, I can relax a little bit and there's no, no sensation.
So all of these things really tied together and show us that, you know, we are hitting muscular
failure because, you know, we're hitting maximum tolerable protection effort, which is perfectly in
line with what happens in longer durations of exercise.
So I think, you know, some people are going, oh, well, you know, the psychobiological model of
fatigue was, you know, intended using my words very, very carefully here, intended for use in the
context of endurance sport.
Yes, it was, but it was actually tested in the strength training context.
Because if you look at the studies that have gone into figuring out how the psychobiological model
of fatigue works, used biceps curls, use biceps curves to figure out how the sensation of innovation
works, which is the signal coming from the motine, coming from the motor cortex, which produces
motine agreement, but it also produces a sensation of effort related to the motine agreement signal.
Well, that was tested in strength training contexts.
So yeah, the the the intention behind the work that was done on the psychological model of fatigue
was for use in endurance exercise, but it actually was tested in strength training context, even
though it was intended for use in endurance ones.
Yeah.
So that's sort of where I was on the muscular failure things.
So we've got supraspinal now you've just discussed it, you mentioned the the calcium modulator
fatigue previously.
I had one question on that.
So you said?
Before we do that, can I can I kind of group them together and do all the CNS ones first?
So the reality is that spinal CNFT is not very complicated, so we can just very quickly outline it.
All it is, is a desensitisation of the mote neurons in the spinal cord to the mote unit recruitment
signal.
So you send recruitment down the spinal cord motor neurons and once you start doing that, it starts
to resist you.
That's all that happens.
So essentially you start out with a certain level of central motor band and as you send more and
more and more of it down the motor neurons, you start to get less getting through to the muscle.
And that basically creates the same effect as superspinal sensitivity, except it's not a sensation.
It's linked to the desensitization of the motor neurons in terms of the dissipation of these things.
The dissipation of superspinal tracks the sensation going away.
So if you're like breathing hard, like 3 minutes later you do a set of squats, 10 squats, whatever,
and you're still breathing hard several minutes later, that sensation is telling you that you've got
superspinal sinusitig present.
In contrast, you can't really see that with spinal sinusitig.
It's just there and it decays very, very rapidly, 30 seconds or so, and most of it's gone, but it
tends to have a bit of a long tail sitting there in the background that can kind of does last for a
couple of minutes, if not, you know, longer after the set has been completed.
So all we've got there is 2 very, very different forms of CNSTG mechanism, both leading to the same
output, which is a reduction in motor unit recruitment.
And we'll come back to that later on because it's critically important, but fundamentally actually
working in different ways and having different dissipation trajectories.
So as you're right, as you rightly said a minute ago, that leaves us down with the peripheral ones
which are metabolite related and calcium I related.
OK, so now I've got a question on spinal.
So both superspinal and spinal CNS fatigue, the magnitude of that is going to be driven by obviously
not just this, but one of the components of variables will be number of repetitions, right.
So if we're looking like spinal CNS fatigue, then ultimately the duration of that set is going to to
have an impact.
So even though someone's not feeling the effects of spinal CNS fatigue, if someone were to do say a
single repetition compared to a set of 20 or even an isometric set, then it's going to have, it's
going to take a varying amount of time for that to dissipate, yes.
Yeah.
So broadly speaking, the total uninterrupted time that you have been contracting MSR 4 is going to
be the primary determinant of your spinal CNST.
Once you have interruptions then you can obviously because of the very fast recovery of that
particular type of T mechanism then you tend to start seeing a different effect.
So if you compare like a sort of reasonably not a long isometric, but like even 10:15 second
isometric, then you'd see a lot more spinal sensitive than that than you might expect from the
equivalent duration of dynamic repetitions.
Because of the dynamics, you actually have these little breaks between each repetition.
But fundamentally, when we're looking at normal strength training, then broadly speaking, the higher
the Rep range, the more spinal sensitivity you're going to get.
And the reality is that because sensations tend to do the same thing, they tend to build with
repetitions as well.
You tend to have both CNST mechanisms tracking Rep range, which is pretty closely.
So this is one of those interesting things that long time followers will know that CNS fatigues
during workout pretty much kind of increase in line with work range.
Most people in the fitness industry think it's the opposite.
I think that heavy loads create sensitive and it just doesn't do that.
It's just not how it works.
Yeah, but both types of CNSRT.
There were types, yeah.
And if someone were to do, say a longer isometric, a 22nd isometric, would you still say that a good
Shank of that spinal CNSRT will dissipate within 30 seconds?
Or might that push it even higher?
So I think the dissipation rates would still be, I think you'd still see relatively fast
dissipation.
I think really what you're you're, you're kind of losing out there is that, you know, towards the
end of that, that isometric, you're not really getting what you think you're getting.
That's the problem.
OK, so you think it's worse within the set rather than?
Yeah, I do.
I don't, I don't think the, I don't think it's because there's no real incentive for spinal
sensitive to stick around.
I mean, it's highly protective during the actual contraction itself, but I don't think there's a lot
of incentive for it to hang around afterwards.
If you're doing a single repetition or, or double or triple, you know low repetitions, then
presumably say so we're saying, OK, a lot of spinal C&S fatigue is dissipating quickly.
You've done a low Rep set, there's no way you're entering another set even if you had a very short
rest period with more spinal sinus fatigue than if you were just to do a single moderate Rep set.
Right?
Like if spinal sinus fatigue is driven by the duration of the contraction, then a set of 10 surely
will always be producing more spinal sinus fatigue at the end of that single set.
Like towards the end of it then even if you need 2 sets of triples with a shorter rest period.
If we just look in spinal sinus fatigue right?
Sure.
That makes sense.
Yeah.
So I mean, The thing is, yeah, putting brakes into your set is going to limit both superspinal and
spinal really.
I mean, as long as you, Yeah, I mean, if you, if you did say, you know, A10 Rep Max and you compared
that with, you know, sort of as a straight set all the way through.
And you compared that with a cluster format where you broke that up into say, I don't know, four
sets of three.
And you met with the same kind of load and you ended up pretty much hitting failure at the end of
that.
Then your spinal CST would be lower at the end, even though you've done more repetitions with the
cluster format because she'd had these breaks in between, quite substantial breaks in between.
So the really the spinal CST would probably only be the magnitude of the last three reps more or
less superspinal wise.
I think it would be a more of a muchness between the two because if you're hitting failure at the
end of your final cluster, then you're probably in a more or less the same kind of place as long as
your your Rep range is the same fundamentally same. 12 Rep Max or 10 Rep Max?
What?
Sorry, 10 Rep Max.
What as the example, you're probably in the same kind of place as well as regards the superspinal.
But yeah, I think you'd have less, less spinal in that in that context.
I'd never thought about that.
Yeah, I think that's quite interesting.
I actually think there's something in that in terms of heavy program.
I'm going to think about that more afterwards.
Now earlier you mentioned if you did a set and you waited a long period of time, let's say 10
minutes and you did another set, then the fatigue that is still present there is showing you that
the calcium ion related fatigue and exhortation contraction company failure.
Now my question is, is there any value if, if post worker fatigue is predominantly driven by muscle
damage, which is driven by calcium ion fatigue or calcium ion accumulation, then could one use that
as a proxy for how much muscle damage they might be experiencing?
If someone were to do a workout and then say an hour later I'd come back and and train one of those
exercises.
They could theoretically be using that to to actually see to an extent.
Obviously it's like it'll be hard to quantify, but how much muscle damage might be might potentially
occur due to the effect of the calcium and fatigue, Yeah.
Yeah.
I mean, I think really anything 20 minutes onwards is probably going to give you the same
information more or less the, I mean, obviously if you have created a decent junk of muscle damage,
then you'll have a secondary muscle damage effect over the course of the day and it'll start to get
worse rather than better.
But broadly speaking, if you look at the static stretching fatigue studies, because obviously the
only type of long lasting, long lasting is not the right word.
The only type of fatigue that static stretching produces that lasts more than a few minutes has got
to be calcium.
I related to fatigue.
It can't be anything else.
So if you, if you can't look at that, generally speaking, you do see 20 minutes, you do see static
stretching producing fatigue and it's a pretty much a flat line.
So you create some fatigue with the static stretch.
And yes, there's a little bit of neural stuff going on, but you know, broadly speaking, the only
thing that lasts is going to be that calcium ion related fatigue effect from the stretch.
Yeah, allowing the stretch activated iron tunnels to open.
You get calcium is flowing into the fiber and then you get excitation, contraction, coupling failure
and that pretty much is more or less static over 20 minutes following the stretch, so.
OK so someone was convinced that they just experienced stacks of muscle damage.
They damage very easily.
Then you can, yeah, you could simply do a set, give it 20 minutes, don't do anything else.
Come back, do a set and you'll see the manager.
So the interesting thing is you could, you could do a test on one day where you do a normal rest
period like say 3 minutes, 4 and 4 minutes, whatever.
And you could see how many reps you lose doing that.
And then you could do a completely different experiment on the next workout and you could do the 20
minute rest period.
And as long as you're not doing other stuff in between and creating an exercise order effect, then
yeah, you could see whether the fatigues were the same.
If the fatigues were the same.
So let's say you did 10 reps in the first set and then 7 reps in your second set.
And it didn't matter whether you'd done, you know, kind of a 3 minute rest period or a 1020 minute
rest period, then that would tell you you were extremely susceptible to calcium, I related fatigue
and you weren't really getting anything else.
But I don't think that would be, I think that would be very unusual, but it would it would tell you
that that was what was happening.
OK, great.
I think there's a couple of interesting things there.
So moving on to there's other peripheral fatigue then that we haven't covered.
Yeah.
So basically you've got two types.
You've got the.
And when I say type, I'm grouping these.
So this is this podcast is not really supposed to kind of take people from, you know, like sort of
completely not knowing anything about how the T mechanisms work to having a complete detailed, you
know, list of every single fatigue mechanism beyond that.
And my Patreon is probably where you need to go.
But broadly speaking, we've got categories or groups of T mechanism, calcium I'm related and then
metabolite related.
And that's just kind of descriptive.
It's what they are.
So obviously the metabolite related T mechanisms are produced by metabolic processors.
Calcium I'm related T mechanisms are produced when calcium ions are put into the muscle fibre in
response.
The activation or the stretch, I mean either of those two things.
So metabolite relativity mechanisms, generally speaking, we tend to focus on two.
We tend to focus on the hydrogen ions, which is also called acidosis and we tend to focus on
phosphates.
So broadly speaking, when we look at acidosis, acidosis has been a topic of intense interest in
fatigue for very, very many decades.
There was a lot of confusion and this is going to trip a lot of people up.
So just as a very quick, a kind of aside, the hypertrophy research committee wasn't really
interested in how fatigue worked until I came along and started saying actually you need to know how
fatigue worked because otherwise nothing makes any sense.
And the reason I wanted to make, you know, kind of emphasize the importance of fatigue is because
fatigue can, as we talked about earlier, affect motor unit recruitment.
And if you can't hit the high level of recruitment, then you can't activate the fibres you want to
train.
You can't activate those fibres and train them, you can't grow them.
Similarly, if you look at calcium, I related fatigue, it does reduce, does reduce the mechanical
tension of the single fibre.
So you've got these two things that are important, fibre, which is high recruitment and a single
fibre tension, both being negatively affected by fatigue.
So I kind of pointed out that you need to know this stuff if you want to, to actually understand how
strength training is stimulating muscle growth.
But before I really did that, everyone was just like, well, you know, fatigue is complicated and,
and wave your hands in the air and forget about it.
But it actually is really, really important that we understand what's going on.
But there are two groups of mechanisms.
You've got the calcium ammode fatigue, which reduces mechanical tension of the fibre.
And then you've got metabolites that really don't do that.
Now if you look at the history of study of acidosis, you will run into a number of roadblocks pretty
quickly.
And the reason for that is because the way that acidosis has been studied has varied over the
decades.
And the main thing that's buried, lots of things have varied in the context of how it's studied.
But one of the main things that's buried is the temperature at which the Moss fibres are kind of
tested.
And the problem is the acidosis seems to behave quite differently depending on the temperature that
you are keeping the Moss fibres at.
So if you keep them at way below physical logical temperatures, they tend to produce slightly
different effects compared to when you measure them at normal kind of body temperatures.
Also, another thing that's very different is that the we we talked before about how fatigue can be
anything that's objective to the performance of the body.
So in the context of muscle fibers, often they measure force production.
Now the really annoying thing about acidosis is that it doesn't really change force production that
much.
It actually primarily changes shortening velocity.
And that's really then going to cause problems when you start looking at trying to compare, when
you're trying to compare different studies in the literature and you're like somebody's used a power
measurement or somebody's used a force measurement.
And like suddenly you're going to get really, really different results depending on what you're
actually measuring.
Because you're trying to measure fatigue in the context of manipulating metabolites around the
muscle fibre.
You're going to get very different results depending on what the room temp.
So room temperature, you're going to get very different results depending on what the temperature is
around the muscle fibre and also what your actual fatigue measurement is.
That being said, it does look like the most kind of clear picture what's going on is that
metabolites are primarily slowing down shortening velocities rather than actually changing the
mechanical tension that the fibres could produce that much.
And the best example I can give of this in the context of acidosis is that the, the, the, the way
that acidosis works is very similar to the way that cold temperatures work.
So if you've kind of been outside when it's really cold and you let your hands get a little bit
cold, then you, what you'll notice is that your grip strength isn't really that different, but your
speed of movement with your fingers is incredibly slow.
And that's basically because the temperature, the air temperature is slowing down the rate at which
you can use the reactions, the metabolic reactions inside the muscle fibers and allow you to move in
the direction you want to go in.
Now ultimately that isn't really changing mechanical tension as much as most people think it is.
It really is primarily just slowing down the speed which you can shorten the muscle virus.
And as a result, the metabolite related fatigue, especially in the case of acidosis is not actually
altering the amount of mechanical tension that you can generate.
It's just slowing down the fibre.
Now, of course, the other thing that happens is as you slow down a muscle, because you've obviously
got lots of muscle fibers working in parallel with each other, if you slow down the muscle fibers
shortening velocity of some of your muscle fibers, then the whole muscle slows down.
Even the fibers that weren't necessarily, you know, kind of experiencing the same degree of fatigue
and now going to experience a slow movement velocity because everything else is slowing down.
So what you end up with is applying a higher level of tension simply because the force will last
relationship.
Now this is kind of getting into the stimulating Rep kind of model, which, you know, isn't really
what I wanted to kind of get into too much today.
We'll do that in another episode.
But fundamentally, when we look at a strength training set approaching failure, what we're going to
see is that slowing down of the Moss fibre shortening velocity, but we're not really going to see
much of a reduction in mechanical tension.
We're primarily, at least not from metabolites.
We're primarily going to see an increase due to the force velocity relationship.
Now, yeah, if you have a lot of calcium, you can start to create a negative effect on tension.
But primarily if it's just metabolise, whether it's acidosis or phosphates, it doesn't really seem
to matter that much.
You'll actually end up with a relatively kind of minimal negative impact on the mechanical tension
that you're needing to produce the stimulus fibre to those most fibres.
Now you've grouped those together, is there conditions which will lead to more from one versus the
other?
Not really.
I mean, acidosis will happen earlier.
So you'll hit you'll hit acidosis much, much earlier than you will phosphate.
But phosphates have kind of a slightly slower kind of rate of development for various reasons.
So fundamentally, yeah, it's going to be the acidosis that is earlier.
But I don't think we would see anything particularly manipulating that in One Direction or the
other.
I mean, they're just pretty straightforward processes that happen the same way.
And in terms of calcium ions?
In terms of calcium ions, you've got a number of factors that do make quite a big difference.
So we said before, you've got two factors that drive calcium and accumulation, 1 is activation and
the other is stretch.
So with activation as you approach failure, you're going to get obviously kind of a marked increase
in the amount of calcium and accumulation as you activate more muscle fibres.
So, but you've also got a duration dependent phenomenon.
So the more repetitions you do, the more activation you're going to be experiencing for a longer
period of time and the more calcium and accumulation you get.
So broadly speaking, Rep range, volume and proximity to failure are kind of going to drive
activation related calcium and accumulation.
And then on the stretch side, obviously stretch position.
So whether it's a a strict position exercise or a contract position exercise, and then obviously
whether you're doing anything different in the eccentric phase.
So you can kind of start from either no eccentric phase, a normal eccentric phase, a very slow
eccentric phase or an eccentric overload.
And it will grade upwards in terms of calcium and accumulation across that spectrum.
So that's all the different fatigue mechanisms in this context we need to understand.
Yeah.
Yeah.
I mean, that's basically the fatigue mechanisms as they're occurring.
What we have to remember then is that if we reduce recruitment because of spinal CNS fatigues and
it's still reduced when we start the next set, we have a problem in terms of the amount of
hypertrophy we can stimulate in that second set.
It's going to be reduced because the number of fibres that are activated and can experience
hypertrophy is reduced.
Now, importantly, this does two things.
Firstly, it reduces the total hypertrophy you're going to get from that set in the context of the
training program you're doing.
But if you're repeatedly doing most of your sets with that subdued level of recruitment, then your
long term growth capacity now is going to be lower.
Because if you're not hitting enough, say for example, say for example you're doing a body part
split program, your first set is the only one where you hit your highest levels of recruitment.
Every other set because you're doing one of these programs like we've talked about today.
Yes, you're doing sets of bench.
You're doing 15 seconds between sets your first set.
Is the only one where you right, you are literally doing one set per week as far as the top
nosifibres in your muscle are concerned.
They are not going to then be still growing or maintaining that growth that you've provided stimulus
for them and the following workout next Monday or even you know whenever I mean before that at some
point they'll sort of have gone back to their previous size.
So you are not going to maintain that from week to week to week if you're just doing one workout per
week of 30 sets of bench or whatever 3 number we can think of, so, so.
But in this case, when he was doing it twice a week, he may be able to maintain it OK, assuming that
the.
Recovery was there, yeah, he probably wasn't.
So yeah, basically the other sets that you do after that first one are going to be done with lower
levels of recruitment.
So they're never really going to be able to provide that same stimulus to that set of fibres that
were hit at the very top end of the motor unit pool.
So the thing about recruitment is it actually creates a slightly different effect from just saying,
oh, I get less hypertrophy because I'm, you know, fatigued.
Well, hang on a minute.
It's not just about less hypertrophy across the muscle.
It's like, where is it happening?
You're actually, you're completely cancelling out, you know, a number of fibers and saying they are
not participating in the next strength training sets.
On the peripheral side, you know, obviously we've got slightly different things going on with the
metabolites.
They're largely kind of irrelevant.
They do create a reduction exercise performance, but they're not really creating a negative effect
in terms of mechanical tension, not not meaningfully calcium ions are.
So the example that I, I said when we were talking about how we're going to strict to this
conversation earlier, I said my favorite example for this is to compare a normal strength training
set or sequence of sets.
Like for example, you could say I'm going to do some hip thrusts.
So you could do like three sets of hip thrusts.
You're going to see there's going to be changing performance from set to set to set in that context.
And if you use shorter rest periods, then you're going to get a bigger drop in reps.
But the reality is that because it's a contract to position exercise and it's a strengthening
exercise.
And if you're using slightly heavier loading, you're all going to end up with most of that being
metabolite related, most of the overall fatigue.
In contrast, if I were to do say an eccentric exercise now, do multiple sets of eccentric exercise
now to do say an ordic curl, then you'd be getting a lot of calcium.
I related fatigue in that scenario.
And you'd see a very different situation happening in that second scenario.
You'd be getting calcium ion accumulation that would stay with you and reduce the single fibre
tension and that would then lead to huge reductions in the stimulus for hypertrophy in the
subsequent sets.
This is why if you look at the dose responses of strength training to of hypertrophy to strength
training volume, you get a relatively kind of sort of interesting non linear curve with strength
training, but you get a much flatter curve with eccentric training.
And it's because your subsequent sets are basically annihilating the ability to produce mechanical
attention on the single fiber level with the calcium relativity mechanisms that you get from the
stretched kind of or the stretch of the fibres, opening the stretch activity channels and lowering
the calcium eyes into the fibres.
So very, very different situations depending on the type of strength training you're doing and just
highlights the difference in the 2 fatigue mechanisms.
So I actually want to break that down further because I think this is going to be really valuable
for people to hear.
So let's actually compare different conditions, different scenarios.
So let's say someone is doing a a low repetition set of a contracted position exercise and they're
doing short rest periods.
What are the main types of fatigue mechanisms that they're going to accumulate in that scenario
compared to?
Compare that then to long rest periods.
So if you're doing like a hip thrust, the example I gave to start with and we'll maybe do a biceps
curl example or something like that later on.
If we start with a hip thrust example, you are you are doing a multi joint exercise.
So you are going to have sensation related kind of fatigue as in superspinal fatigue happening.
But if you're doing heavy loads, you're not going to get an enormous amount of that and you're not
going to get an enormous amount of spinal sensitive either.
Basically, if you're doing say a set of five hip thrusts, most of your fatigue is actually going to
be metabolite related.
Now this is one of those things that I say and people kind of either nod or they just kind of freak
out.
If they're nodding, it's because they're probably haven't kind of put it two and two together and
realized that everybody else in the fitness industry thinks that metabolite relativity happens more
so with lighter loads than with heavier loads.
In absolute terms, that is true.
In relative terms, it's not.
So in relative terms, your heavy strength training exercises, especially if their contract position,
are going to be mostly metabolite relativity, which is why you can just bang out set up, set up to
set of them if you leave a reasonable rest period because they just bounce back.
Metabolites leave the muscle and completely bounce back and don't leave any problems behind.
Mind, this is a really important thing.
So yeah, I think if it's a multi joint exercise, like a thrust, then you'd have metabolite, you'd
have a little bit of superspinal from the cardiovascular sensations that you were getting because
you would be dumping lactate into the system because the muscles you're using are big.
And you would have that respiratory response to that, to that lactate entering the system from the
muscles that you just used.
So I think you would have a sort of super spinal fatigue effect.
But again, you know how long that would last.
I don't.
I don't.
Really.
So you said that so calcium ion minimal?
It would be fairly mental in the contract position with heavy loads, yeah.
Yeah.
And then the Super spinal.
So if it's a multi joint, it'll be higher.
If it's a unilateral single joint, for example, then it'll be.
Low, sure.
So if you were doing like a triceps extension, you know, maybe banded, so you were trying to aim for
the contract position, you know, you probably wouldn't have very much superspinal fatigue at all in
that particular context.
So let's let's stick with hip thrusters as the multi joint example and like banded extension as the
as the single joint one.
I think really you'd see mostly metabolites in both, but you'd see a bit more superspinal in hip
thrust simply because you've got that multi joint exercise creating a cardiovascular response.
So then if you gave a long rest period for both of those, you've let the metabolite fatigue
dissipate the spinal fatigue we're not concerned about and the huge stress is suffering from some
super spinal.
But in that long rest period, we should have dissipated the supraspinal scene as fatigue as well.
So in a long rest period, basically all of those fatigue mechanisms should have dissipated mostly
for the hip trust, right?
I mean they'll.
Both.
They'll both.
It's just that you've kind of wasted some time with the triceps extension because you didn't need
that hugely long rest period.
Yeah.
So now let's say short rest period.
So let's what maybe say 30 to 60 seconds as an example.
Well, it depends.
I mean like I think 30 seconds your starting to have some spinal CRST still present.
Yeah, I think you probably, you probably if you aim for a minute, if you, if you say a minute, then
I would say that the hip first, you're still going to have some superspinal, you're still going to
have a cardiovascular response.
You're probably going to be losing a bit of recruitment on your second set triceps extension.
Probably not.
Yeah, yeah.
So see, that's really interesting because we're saying ultimately if you're doing 60 seconds, you're
probably getting everything out of that in the triceps extension.
There's no need to wait two 3-4 minutes.
No, I don't think so.
Now if we were to compare that to moderate, let's say 12 repetitions, same exercise, it's still got
the hip Truss and you still have our triceps banded extension.
Well, now with the hip Truss, you really are going to have to wait because you are going to have a
meaningful cardiovascular response, so.
So we still still don't have a lot of calcium iron really.
We we still got obviously now more superspinal in both scenarios.
There's going to be more superspinal, but ultimately way more in our hip stress example, yeah.
You're you're going to have more of everything.
Not as soon as you increase Rep ranges, you're going to have more of everything.
So you are going to have a little bit more calcium related.
You can have more spinal, you can have more superspinal, you can have more metabolites.
I mean that just goes with the territory.
But yeah, I mean in terms of the hip thrust, you are probably going to have to wait a good couple of
minutes longer now, you know.
And in terms of the triceps extension, yeah, I mean again, probably going to have to be waiting a
little bit longer, but not, not anywhere near as much.
So again, if we, if we say this, we this minute kind of timeline, we, we wait a minute you'd say
with the triceps extension there's probably there may still be a bit of super spinal CNS fatigue
present.
Yeah, I think I would probably put because again, super spinal doesn't just come from a
cardiovascular sensations, it will come from a metabolite feelings as well.
So it's not from anything discomforting.
So if you finish your triceps extensions and you can feel the ache in your arms from the from the
kind of the metabolites accumulating and you can still kind of feel that like 3045 sixty seconds
later, then you're just probably going to have to leave it another 30 seconds.
So I'm not saying what the number is, but you know, it's going to be probably, probably a little bit
more than than what it would be with a heavier load protocol.
But again, you're moving both of them upwards.
You know, with the hip host and, and the, and the tragic extension you started out, you know, kind
of at different levels with the longer rest period being required for the hip host as you go to high
Rep ranges, both of them just move up together.
You know, it's not like they change relative to each other.
They still say the same, more or less relative to each other.
It's just the both of them require longer rest periods now.
So now the hipster.
Previously we said maybe 3 minutes or so is probably going to be adequate.
So now we're saying, hey, that might be 5 minutes.
Yeah, it might be.
It might be.
4 or 5 minutes depending on the person, depending on the load mass, all that.
Yeah, which is why I started this episode by saying I think the standard 2-3 minute recommendation
doesn't make any sense because if we're talking high repetition multi sets, it needs to be longer.
Sorry, high repetition, multi joints and if we're talking low repetition, single join, unilateral,
whatever, realistically it's it's going to be shorter and.
This is this is the, this is the thing that I keep trying to avoid ranting about and I just keep
coming back to which is that on the one hand, you've got evidence based trying to tell people to,
you know, kind of do the same thing all the time with everything because that's the only way that
they know how to think.
And then on the physiological side, you've basically got people assigned trying to say, well, what
is the reason that you are trying to?
You know, kind of increase the rest period and if you understand the reason that you're trying to
increase the rest period is to avoid primarily avoid super spinal CNS fatigue, then suddenly you can
now start to program different rest periods in different situations.
And yes, it is going to be very different if you're doing a, you know, multi joint exercise like a
squat and you're doing moderate loads and you, you know, 10-12 repetitions per set, that is going to
require much, much, much longer rest period than if you're doing biceps curls.
I mean, that's just how it is.
And then once again we could say the same thing if we were now say someone had the desire to do a
2025 Rep set.
Then each of those times it is going to get pushed further up again.
I.
Mean honestly when you start to get into 20 Rep plus territory, your arrest periods are almost
academic because you aren't recovering.
The only time I can, I mean, maybe there's an exception to this, but the only time I can ever recall
programming a set that that high to say like I might do this for a back extension where it's just
impractical maybe to load it too high or something like that.
And I would do it as one set, the final set of the workout, because you're probably going to need 15
minutes before the heart rate's going to be back down to normal.
So I'd be like, did a set walk out of the gym.
We're not.
You're not going to wait any longer.
You're not going to wait to another.
I mean, I think that's what you have to do.
I mean, it doesn't make any sense otherwise.
I mean, just kind of coming back to the examples that we started with the hip thrust and the triceps
extension, which was banded to make it hardest in the contract position.
You could now look at examples of say, a back squat and a biceps Co, maybe a breach Co.
So you've now got a stretch position exercise instead of contract position exercise.
All you've got to appreciate now is that the reality is that none of the modifiable FT mechanisms
are any different.
So if you compare your hip thrust and your back squat, and OK, I know there's muscle mass
differences in the back squat's going to feel a lot more cardiovascular than their thrust.
But ignoring that, you aren't really going to see any differences in terms of what you can modify.
You are going to lose more reps on those two stretch position exercises, but you can't do anything
about it.
You literally can't do anything about it because.
Once you compare 5 to 12, both of those exercises are going to suffer the same from the calcium.
Is that what you're saying?
What I'm saying is that let's say for example, you were doing hip thrust and I said to you, pretty
much the only reason you're going to be losing reps is superspinal CNST.
So try and avoid losing reps and you kind of, you know, realize that you can keep your Rep numbers
across three search by doing 4 minute rest periods.
Fantastic.
They can't do that with the squat because there's no way in which you can avoid losing reps unless
you're immune to calcium amvot tea, which nobody is.
I mean, I know there's some nonsense flying around where people think that the repeat about effect
is some kind of way of avoiding fatigue happening full stop, which is absolutely nuts.
But you know, there's there's like you can't actually avoid losing reps in a stretch position
exercise because the calcium amvot tea doesn't go away inside the workout.
So reputations in reserve, talk to us about that.
So what we've talked about so far then is mainly the Rep range and the stretch position being the
two primary drivers of what your fatigue is going to look like after each set.
Proximity to failure as I've already said is going to affect, I really pointed out the defects,
calcium, I might require a lot, but it also affects metabolite relative T So you're going to get hit
by both of those.
And then if you look at the Super spinal, spinal side of things, firstly, you do get hit there as
well.
So basically every fatigue mechanism that we've talked about so far are groups of mechanisms because
these aren't specific mechanisms, they're groups of mechanisms.
These groups of mechanisms of fatigue are going to be very negatively affected by those last couple
of reps extra to failure.
Now I often refer to that in the context of post workout fatigue because calcium IWOT is very, very
sensitive to those last couple of reps, but the others are as well, just less so.
So what you'll find is that you will drop fewer reps if you leave a Rep in reserve or two reps in
reserve than if you aren't trained to failure.
So if you are looking to use short to rest periods, then using reps in reserve is a very, very
effective way.
And if you take that to an extrapolation and you realize that that makes clusters a lot more logical
if you want to use, if you, if you want to go down the rest period, shortening rest period, maybe
you've got like a desire to structure a workout plan that is highly efficient for time reasons.
Clusters is going to be a lot more efficient because it's just another step in the same direction.
You know, ultimately you're trying to stay further away from failure, but you're trying to get as
many stimulating routes as possible as you can.
Well OK, then just use clusters with heavy loads then.
So proximity of failure, reaction reserve, you've obviously said it affects all these clustered
clusters of fatigue mechanisms shouldn't use the word classes.
Groups, Yeah.
Groups, yeah.
Yeah.
But those, some of those obviously don't matter that much in the sense that they will still recover.
Some of those won't recover like calcium, iron fatigue.
So if someone had longer rest periods, 5 minutes or whatever, it doesn't really matter if they're
doing an exercise that isn't that susceptible to calcium and fatigue accumulation damage, etcetera.
If they take that set to failure, because they'll be able to recover from that in the five, 610
minutes, however long it is, depending on how many repetitions they've done.
But if someone is doing a stretch position exercise, they're not going to recover from that.
That's.
An interesting.
Point.
That's an interesting point.
I mean, I mean, I always argue that reps in reserve makes more sense when you're using stretch
position exercises because it's supposed to work out fatigue modifier as well.
But yeah, it does make sense in the context of a single worker.
So, yeah, I mean, if you're again comparing the the hip thrust and the abundant triceps extension
with the the squat and the preacher curl, then yeah, I mean we could train to failure on the
contract position exercises and you know, leave the rest period and then go after it again and that
would be fine.
In the case of the stretch position exercises, the squat and the biceps go would be like, well, does
it make sense to leave a Rep in reserve here or there, but you'd also want to be sensitive about the
Rep ranges.
I mean always going to make more sense to our Rep ranges in those calcium amylated fatigue
situations as well.
I mean, ultimately you can.
The way that you can see it is that with contract position exercises, you can get away with a lot
more.
You can do higher RIP ranges, you can do training close to failure, you can do higher volumes, you
can do the whole kind of thing.
I mean, like you can chase those sort of more body golden era bodybuilding ideas if you really want
to a little bit.
I mean, within reason.
I mean, not like we've seen today with the example workout that you showed us, but like you can
chase those things a little bit if you want to do that.
But on the stretch position side, you just can't do that.
It won't.
It won't re.
It'll catch up with you either within the workout and you'll lose reps like nobody's business or
it'll catch up with you in the post workout when it'll create a post workout muscle damage.
One application of what we've talked about here and what we've talked about in other episodes where
you talk about classes, we talk about drop sets.
We kind of made this point last week when we were contrasting classes and drop sets of where you
might use one versus the other is some of these variables matter a lot more or will influence
different exercises in different ways.
And when you look at programming, what I see is most, most of the time people will use a method or a
structure.
They'll use a repetition range, they'll use rest periods, they'll use whatever variables and they'll
just blanket applied to every exercise in that program.
And in reality, these variables ultimately should actually be specific to that exercise.
And you know, we said this last week with classes and with drop sets.
If if one were going to use CLA, use drop sets, it wouldn't make sense to do that with an exercise
that it was more susceptible to a lot of super spinal scene as fatigue.
That's where clusters would make more sense.
So I think, I think the take away for me with that is is a program.
If a program looks really uniform, all the variables are the same for every exercise.
Odds are you're actually short changing some of those exercises.
In some cases, yeah.
I mean, I think there are some variables that just work for everything.
I mean, I mean leaving practical, leaving practical considerations aside, if if you can practically
use a heavy ish load for every exercise that you've got in your program, then a heavy load is going
to work for you.
I mean, it's just this.
Similarly, if you want to leave one RIP and reserve for every exercise, again, that's going to work
for you.
You're not going to lose anything by doing that.
Yeah, really.
No, I mean.
But if you're going to failure for every single exercise and you're doing multi sets, then that
would be a case where actually some of these.
Exercises, yeah.
Now you've got a problem.
So I think, I think there are some training variables that just do work for everything.
So like if somebody wants to program in the five to seven Rep range and they want to leave a Rep and
reserve, then most of the time, as long as the exercise doesn't have a practical, you know, yeah.
Super vanilla program which will work basically for everything.
You've got like a a single set, five to seven, one Rep and reserve.
That's going to work basically for everything.
But if you want to do something that's a little bit more exciting.
Start doing if you want to start.
Well, firstly, let's recognize that there are going to be some exercises that people just don't
either feel comfortable programming in that range or maybe there's practically difficult to do in
that range.
OK, fine.
We're not really talking about that.
Then if you want to then say, well, OK, but could I do a higher Rep range, you know, anyway, And I'm
like, well, yeah, if you've got a contract position excise, you could push it into a slightly higher
Rep range and it wouldn't really create you huge issues.
Similarly, training to failure again contract position excise, again, it's not going to really
create huge issues for you.
It's it's going to start costing you on the on the stretch position exercises much, much more if you
start making those choices.
And now the same thing then applies if you now start to my rest period.
So if you're doing a multi set protocol, then you could, you know, just leave 4 or 5 minutes rest on
everything.
And you're not, I mean, physiologically you're not really making a mistake there.
Practically, you're going to be really bored.
But OK, fine, it's, it's, it's not going to create huge problems, but you could start to chisel away
at that rest period for your smaller muscle mass exercises where you're not creating out superspinal
CNSD.
So you look at all your arm work, all your single joint stuff and you could go, OK, I don't need to
take those super long rest periods.
I can actually get away with 9 seconds or, you know, whatever.
And as I've said before, if you really want to know, you can literally just start checking this
yourself.
You can either just literally count reps because if you're losing a lot of reps straight away, you
know that it's not working.
Or you can use a heart rate monitor and just monitor, you know, whether your heart rate is coming
down or not.
I mean, if it's still really, really high on your second set, then it's telling you that you're
probably not ready to do a second set, you know, So I think there's there's Ways and Means of of
kind of checking this, you know, ourselves if you want to do that.
Yeah, that's interesting.
So you could literally have, you know, I called it a vanilla program before.
We've got single sets, five to seven, you know, 4 minute dress periods, one Rep in reserve and you
could say, hey, you you can't you can't screw this up.
Really.
Like maybe you could, you could fail to yeah, just to get bored or you might you might fail to
choose appropriate exercises to train the muscle you want to train, but that format is unscrew up
able.
And then if you want to go outside of those bounds, you want to use multi sets, you want to use
higher petitions, you want to train a failure, whatever, then really you kind of need to understand
at least fatigue and you need to understand how those variables are affecting fatigue to still be
able to have an optimal training program.
Yeah, although I would point out that, you know, this is not mysterious in the sense that it's
happening outside of our perception.
I mean like you know most people can do a set of squats and realise that they are now
cardiovascularly cooked for the next 5 minutes.
Which is why most of the sealed area plans work when we consider fatigue, because they were able to
intuit what was happening because you can.
Feel it exactly.
It's not mysterious.
It's not it's not happening outside of your kind of visible spectrum, if you want to call it.
I mean, it's like it's, it's happening in your lived experience.
So like you do some biceps curls and within a minute or two you should feel ready to do another set.
You're not feeling any sensations that are telling you that if you do another set you might drop a
Rep whereas.
You may still you may still drop a Rep though you.
May still feel in the case of biceps, especially if they're stretched position because you've got
calcium iodide there.
But the point is that you probably shouldn't feel like you're going to drop another Rep when you try
again.
You know, the contract position exercises, that should actually more or less be the case.
You shouldn't be really dropping reps.
I mean, that's an interesting observation itself, is that if you feel like you should be able to
perform maximum performance and you don't, it's probably pointing towards calcium IoD fatigue.
Yeah, I mean some of my very fate.
I mean like how can someone have favorite fatigue studies?
I have favorite fatigue studies, but I do have these favorite fatigue studies and there's a couple
of them involving drop landings.
And basically the protocol is that you.
I actually, this is one of those studies where I actually remember where I was when I read it the
first time.
That's how much I like this study.
So I remember I was sitting on a train and I was reading this study going, wow, this is amazing.
Basically, I was sitting on this train reading this study and, and there was a there was a family
and the kids were making a lot of noise and I was trying to focus on this study.
And after a while I just forgot about the family making a lot of money because I was so, so
engrossed in this amazing study.
And, and yeah, it was this basically protocol where people would there would be like a sort of a set
of steps up to a sort of a box if you like.
And the subjects would walk up the steps onto the top of this box and not a high box, just it was to
try and minimize the concentric involvement.
And so you'd walk slowly up the steps and then you would drop landing onto the ground.
Then you walk back around and you walk up the steps and drop landing, walk around.
And then did this many, many, many times.
And the really interesting thing is that it's a very, very effective protocol for creating almost
just no fatigue mechanisms of any kind apart from calcium.
I made fatigue because you get this stretch activation, say stretch and activation at the same time
in the drop.
And because you're moving relatively slowly and, and even the all the other points in the in the in
the protocol, you don't really build.
It's just like walking down the street.
I mean, you don't build metabolically fatigue or superspinal fatigue or spinal fatigues and walking
down the street.
So you're just walking and then very gradual set of steps and then drop and then again.
And what happened was that the presence of fatigue as measured by dynamometry was quite meaningful.
So the level of fatigue was really, really kind of visible on the Son of Strength training measures
that were done.
But there was 0 sensation, absolutely 0 sensation.
And this is ABS.
This is crazy to me because basically what you're, you're isolating is all of the other stuff that
we normally get out and just going, we're giving it pure sort of calcium iolated tea.
You can kind of do that with a stretch, although it's not quite so kind of cut and dry, but you
basically you're getting this kind of pure calcium iolated tea.
And it was, you can just imagine these people kind of noticing that they're getting weaker and
weaker and weaker.
They can't feel anything that's giving them signals of to why that's happening.
It's absolutely amazing to me.
But yeah, really cool protocol just demonstrating you can isolate some of this stuff off in certain
circumstances and and create pure types of that you can with static stretching.
But you know, this is another way of doing it and an exercise related way of doing it.
So yeah, I mean, basically any time you've got that kind of stretch position excise component, you
are going to be losing repetitions and you're not really going to be able to feel that.
You're not really able to predict that based on how you feel.
It's not going to happen.
Yeah.
So you, you said a moment ago you can you can feel your superspinalcy and this fatigue coming into
the next set.
Well, you must be able to, because it is literally a sensation that's driving that reduction in your
ability to produce motive recruitment.
So someone can do things like check the heart rate, you know, be conscious of their breathing.
I mean, they're going to be the main metrics that they can, they can assess.
And you know, for me, like I've mentioned in the past, I've been playing around with this quite a
lot using a heart rate monitor.
And you know, I'm finding with low Rep sets, even multi joints, multi joint, upper body, lower
repetition sets, I'm finding that often within about 30 seconds, my heart rate is basically back to
baseline.
And it's not until I've done multiple sets, four or five sets that I'm, there's that fatigue
accumulation occurring in my case.
And you know, I'm, I'm noticing my breathing rate isn't coming back down to normal and whatnot.
So if I'm doing like a cluster protocol or even if I were to do a drop set protocol with low
repetitions and you know, slightly longer between those drops, I'm finding for me there's very
little fatigue that's that's carrying out.
Well, there's still going to be metabolite but very little super spinal seen as fatigue that's
carrying over.
Yeah, I'm mostly the same except with the exception of with pulling exercises.
Yeah, it really, it doesn't really matter what Rep brains are working.
And as soon as I start pulling things then then I'm just my heart rate spikes and I'm done.
But.
Actually an interesting observation on that.
So in the Pelican world that I came out of a common narrative, a common common sort of statement was
don't take pull ups to failure because they will ruin your future sets of pull ups.
You do a set of pull ups to failure, you go, you know, do 5 to failure next set.
You'll get 3 repetitions or two reps or you'll drop heaps.
And it was like pull ups, like this mystical exercise when it comes to that.
Nothing else really is as bad as that.
And.
Effect on that pull down, but yeah, OK.
Well, well, that was that's my question is, and I know you're going to say this, I know because for
you back is weird, Yeah.
But for me, if I take a set of lap pulled out to failure, sure there's still a huge cardiovascular
demand of that.
But if I give it long enough, I will be able to perform that set well, like to a similar standard
again in a few minutes time.
If I take a set of pull ups of failure, I don't believe I'll be able to perform that to the same
level again in a few minutes time.
And and maybe it is just a need longer.
Maybe if I gave it 5 or 6 minutes instead of 3 or 4 minutes, maybe the pull up would be the same as
that pull down.
And I suspect it probably would be.
I mean there's no reason it wouldn't be.
Yeah, exactly.
I will.
Yeah.
But I suspect that's what it is.
And so it's making me think actually that advice all along with should have been just take longer
between pull ups like that probably would have been the solution.
I don't know.
That's an interesting idea.
I honestly find high Rep pull ups so offensive that I never do them but.
Well even just high load I would notice the same thing if I was to load.
No, it's not the same.
More than five Rep, 5 or 6 reps you'll have the same experience.
OK, so people can measure to an extent cerebrospinal CNS fatigue.
They can gauge calcium iron fatigue just due to performance drop when they feel like they recovered
between those sets.
You know, there's a point actually I wanted to say from the Silver era.
This I thought was a very astute observation from Steve Reeves.
And for a while it didn't make sense to me.
I've made this commentary before where like I'll see stuff from the Silver era, but I don't know why
they did that.
They got this bit wrong.
And then like a year later I'd be like, oh, that's why they did it.
Oh, it makes sense.
And I feel like that was Steve.
So in that workout we've covered where Steve was doing 3 different exercises per muscle group, one
set of each.
He suggested, I think he suggested 2 minutes rest between exercises.
OK, 2 minutes adequate.
You know, he's he's most of these were most of them would have been more kind of single joint type
exercises anyway.
They're probably not stacks of fatigue, relatively lower repetition, lower to mordreps.
And then he said take 4 minutes between between muscles and I was like that doesn't know you got
that wrong.
You should have waited longer between sets and and probably didn't need as long between muscles.
And to your point before, well, if you wait longer between everything, you're not losing anything
except efficiency.
So sure, he could have done that.
That would have probably been better, sure.
But that aside, I actually really like the idea of waiting longer between muscles because what
you're doing is you're making sure that there's no accumulated fatigue from your previous muscle
affecting your next muscle.
If there is some accumulating fatigue within that muscle, like you still got that first set on that
first exercise that you mentioned before, you're still getting, you know, Max activation in that
first set.
This is this is a better of, of a potentially bad situation.
I'd prefer that the muscle experience that fatigue than the a new muscle experience it.
No, I can see where you're going with that.
No, Yeah.
I mean, again, a better approach is to look at the exercise itself and say, am I expecting a big
chunk of cardiovascular sensation after this particular exercise?
So if we classify the exercise based on what you think it's going to do, then that's where you want
the rest period to be anchored, I think.
But yeah, no, I mean, if you're looking for a blanket recommendation, that's probably the lesser of
two evils.
Yeah, well, it has made me think, you know, my recommendation now to people is, I mean really I
would, because I'm often doing single sets.
Basically I say before your next set, but certainly before your next muscle, I want you to feel
completely recovered.
You know, even if I've said take two minutes off or three minutes off or whatever before you do that
next muscle, I need you to feel fully recovered.
And you know, we talked a few weeks ago on in one episode recently about the idea of even putting in
smaller muscles between bigger exercises.
Yeah, that strategy of exercise order of sort of looking at your overall workout and going well, you
know, don't put all of your multi joint exercises one after the other and then all of your single
joint stuff.
I mean, I know that traditionally people tend to go, well I want to do all the multi joint stuff 1st
and the single joint stuff Latex.
I want to try and preserve recruitment.
They're trying to work out OK, but reality is if you're trying to construct a workout that you want
to get through, you know, in an efficient way, then having a are kind of broken up between multi
joint, single joint, multi joint, single joint or whatever gives you a little.
Because if you, if you've done say, I don't know, from hip thrusts, whatever.
And then you go over and OK, you give yourself a couple of minutes, but you still can find sort of
feel a little bit of kind of background sensation.
Do some biceps 'cause you're probably not really losing very much, you know, whereas if you try to
do another sort of multi joint exercise like a pull or a press, you probably start to suffer, you
know, some negative effects of on the Rep numbers.
So you know, again, we're not talking about striving for perfection here or try striving for
something that's functional and doable.
So again, take it in that context.
It's not supposed to be like this is the way to do it.
So yeah, I mean, again, you want to do absolutely perfectly, then take all the rest in the world and
you know, kind of do it all perfectly.
Right, I think like probably my favorite way to program if pick one would be to pair a multi joint
with a single joint for that muscle.
And we talked about this with Dorian Yacer's plan where to be a multi joint and then move into a
single joint or even a unilateral.
And for me that just ticks so many boxes because it is maintaining high recruitment in that same
muscle and or even increasing recruitment and it's achieving what we've just said there where you're
just mixing up and you're not, you know, putting all gripping, all of your multi joint, really
cardiovascular demanding exercises together.
I think if you do that, it's again, it's one of those formats where it's kind of hard to stuff this
up.
You get exercise, you already get high improvement and you you kind of mitigate some of this
fatigue.
Yeah, I mean, absolutely is.
There anything you haven't covered that we need to cover regarding rest periods?
Well, I mean, there's there, there are a few other things that are are interesting about them, but
nothing in the context of what we've been talking about today.
Yeah.
I mean, I thought, I actually thought this would be a short conversation.
I didn't think we'd go on as long as we have.
I think, I think we actually could have kept going.
There's, there is actually a lot in this topic.
Hopefully other people feel the same way.
But again, to the point I've returned to a couple of times, we've outlined examples here, but one
could do 30 to 60 seconds between sets, or one could do 2 to 3 minutes, or one could do four or
five, maybe even 6 minutes, and each of those would be appropriate.
And so this blanket statement of just do 2 to 3 minutes off and take two, you know, 2 to 3 minutes
between sets, it just doesn't hold up.
And it might work for half of the exercises you're doing or, or if you're doing very low Rep sets
and it might work for all of them, but you didn't need it for all of them.
Like it just doesn't make sense to do the same thing for every exercise.
Absolutely.
I'm not going to run it again so.
OK, OK, well, thank you guys for joining us.
I do hope, my suspicion is that it will.
Hopefully this conversation will change the way people are programming.
I know the more I've thought about this, it's changed the way I program.
So if it changes it for you, please let us know.
Drop a comment, drop a question in our question box, a message or whatever.
I'd love to see your feedback.
Hopefully join us for another episode, another conversation next week.
Thanks guys.