Episode: 059 Hypertrophy is muscle-fibre specific
URL: https://open.spotify.com/episode/2viqVGwKLV69VQSenh0a9T
Published: 2026-07-06
================================================================================

Welcome back.
Thank you for joining us for another episode of Hypertrophy past and present.
Chris, how are you doing today?
I'm doing OK.
I'm not.
I haven't got very good Wi-Fi at the moment, so if I drop out I will come back on again as soon as
I've as soon as I can.
But you might notice the listener might notice occasional kind of hiccups as I appear and disappear.
It's basically just having a big storm or I've had a big storm and the and the not the Wi-Fi app.
So other than that, I'm doing well.
I will do my best editing job.
I am.
I must have trauma from this because you pause for like half a second before you answered how you
were.
And immediately I was like, Oh no, he's gone, people, we've just started and you're gone.
But no, you're still here.
I'm I'm being a little bit pessimistic, so welcome.
Great.
We what are we talking about today?
We are talking about you know what, before we even launch into the topic for today, the the work out
for today.
I think this is a really interesting work out.
We're talking about Allen Steven.
We've talked about Allen Steven before, not for a long time.
I think only one of his plans in the past.
He was former Mr. America.
We're talking 1940s, nineteen 50s.
One thing I really like about this workout plan, and this is amazing, OK, So it's what's really
irked me lately is this idea going around online that you you cannot do the same exercises.
You need to keep changing exercises.
And obviously we've kind of like pushed that conversation a little bit further, you know, I guess
into the general kind of domain.
And people now understand, OK, don't need a change in exercise every four weeks, but there still
seems to be this idea that I still need to change it at some point.
I still can't do it for, you know, six months.
So I can't do it for a year like it.
Maybe I can do it for more than one phase, but I can't do it for two or I can't do it for four.
I can't do it for six.
And I came across this workout from Alan Steven.
And I just laughed to myself because Alan says this is the work I did for the first four years when
I was training.
I didn't change anything.
I didn't change a single exercise.
I kept it exactly like this for four years.
And he got really strong like he did.
I mean, obviously bodybuilder as well.
He looked amazing.
But just to give you guys a little bit of ideas to how he continued to progress over that time, he
started lifting his overhead.
He was doing nothing like 30 kilos or something like that.
And he progressed to the point of doing over 130 kilos for military press.
And he'd kept this exercise.
He did not change it.
He didn't, you know, use variations to work on sticking points or anything like that.
You didn't get sore joints and sore connected tissues and whatever else.
He just did the same exercises three times per week like everyone else back then and got really
strong and really muscular.
So this, I love this plan.
This is classic, classic silver era.
This is what good bodybuilding plans looked like.
So let's jump in and Alan Stephen, we have talked about him in the past, the formal workout we
talked about if he's really interesting, it was kind of like a really early version of classes.
So if you do want to go back and find that episode, it's a it's a pretty fun way of training.
But this was a 1940s plan, late 1940s.
So we're, you know, talking kind of, I would say relatively early silver era and it's just classic
silver era plan we've got here.
So three times per week we have 10 exercises if we include the pullover, which actually we should
include the pullover because he didn't do it after the squad like they generally did.
So he was actually training the pullover.
Usually they'll do the pullover after the squad and they'll do it light and you know, probably
wasn't really much of an exercise to be honest.
But here he actually was training the pullover.
So he started with a barbell military press.
He then went into his barbell pullover and then barbell curl.
So supernated curl and then pro and press.
So that'll be a bench, a barbell bench, and then a straight arm fly.
So dumbbell fly, a squat, which you know what?
I'm gonna pause and and make a comment here.
When you guys see people talk about in the silver era, this gets really confusing because often
they'll call them laterals and they'll call them like lying laterals, flat laterals, bent over
laterals or bent arm laterals, straight arm laterals.
And sometimes I mean flies, sometimes I mean lateral raises.
It gets really tricky.
So what I try to do is find photos of that person doing that exercise.
So here he was in fact, doing a dumbbell fly.
Then you went to the squat, went into a deadlift, dips, barbell, bent over row, and then concluded
with a barbell reverse curl. 10 exercises.
I think there's a a fair bit here that's quite interesting.
So I'm interested in what jumps out to you, and then I'm gonna mention a couple of things I think
are interesting here.
So just kind of setting the framework for this, this is 10 exercises and he's doing these as a full
body routine three times per.
Week that would help.
I should say how often and how many sets he's doing 3 times per week and he was doing three sets of
each and I don't believe he's he he went up to 10 repetitions.
I don't believe he specified the lower end because obviously they tended to do double progression
method.
I don't know if he was going 6 to 10 or if he was doing 8 to 10.
I'm not sure on what the low end was there, but he went up to 10.
So there's, there's things I like about this program.
I mean, I like the, I like the framework that and I like the context.
So I, I'm also a fan of just kind of finding a program that works and sticking with it for a long
period of time.
My experiences have generally been that that is far and away the best way to get strong in specific
lifts.
I did it for my power lifts, which are not particularly impressive at all by any means.
And I did it for my dip and my kind of weighted chin up, which are a little bit more interesting.
In a long time, listeners will know I got my weight to pull up to a little over body weight.
So I think I was weighing at about 72 1/2 kilos.
I was kind of doing weight to pull ups with 75 and my weight to dip time was about 82 1/2.
So, you know, not amazing by today's standards, but kind of 15 years ago, you know, that was not too
bad.
And I literally just trained exactly the same kind of protocol I was just doing, you know, sort of,
I don't know, maybe two or three sets of maybe 3 to 5 reps two or three times a week.
And I just literally did the same thing for a couple of years.
And I did, as everyone knows, Hepburn, my powerlifting stuff.
And I just did that literally for two years.
So I think that, you know, Alan, Stephen here is really nailed how to, you know, get strong over
long periods of time and also, you know, add muscle mass along the way.
So definitely supporting this, this kind of context here.
These are the exercises.
I think that ultimately I'm just going to comment a little bit on what I see as being different from
a lot of the other kind of programs we've looked at.
There's more chest work in here than I think I've seen in most other Silver era programmes.
So we've got.
So that's a lot.
And if you're doing three sets of each, that is a lot.
It really is a lot.
So I would guess that the bench press probably had a slightly narrower grip.
If he's making that work.
That'd be my guess.
The.
One thing I do about Alan is he actually did change, not like from workout to workout, but in late
workouts he did various grips.
So I believe he actually would do three sets and he would do one set like quite wide, one set a
little bit like halfway, one set narrow.
Yeah, I don't think he did that here.
He did that with dumbbells.
Well, I say obviously he did that later on with dumbbells, but I'm not sure what he was doing in in
this workout.
Cool.
And then obviously we've got a deadlift in here which we don't always get.
We don't always have any kind of hamstrings stimulus at all and a lot of the Silver era stuff.
So those are the things that I think are jumping out at me as being immediately quite different in
terms of back work.
I think we're still limited, which is a general feature of silver era programs.
No event of a row, not found out that exercise by any means.
I think it's hugely unstable and doesn't really target what people wanted to target, but we've got a
pullover in here that's actually functioning as a pullover, which might give you a little bit of
that stimulus.
So you know, it's not, it's not quite as bad as a lot of other routines, but you know, the rest of
it, it's really good.
It's really solid.
I mean, it's interesting to see two different curve variations that are actually targeting different
stuff, which is nice.
You made a comment before we started recording about how, you know, we're going to find out one day
that all these guys were just doing pull ups.
Never told us.
And one thing that is actually funny on that comment, I can tell you this.
Well, so Alan, I've seen Alan say in a quote that the best exercise he did for developing his back
was the behind the neck, chin up.
And yeah, it's not.
In the past, yeah.
I genuinely think that there's there's something weird going on that means that like they were all
kind of only ever writing down the exercises they did with barbells or something.
It's like.
It's body weight exercise.
It doesn't.
Count, it just doesn't get listed.
And I think that's probably, there's probably something in that, you know, but anyway, that's,
that's kind of the observations like I, I, I like it as a program.
I like the fact that he's doing 3 * a week, you know, 1 three sets.
I like the fact that it's a full body routine.
I mean, all of the, the big boxes have been ticked from my point of view and it's a solid set of
exercises.
I mean, he's gonna make a lot of progress on that over a long period of time, which clearly he did
as you, as you pointed out.
So what are you seeing there?
So I find it interesting that this is in some ways is kind of like a a beginner and intermediate
plan and I guess almost early advanced.
So he's, you know, obviously stuck with this plan for four years and got to the to the point that
many people would never even get to in terms of strength and physique wise.
So really he's used this one plan for beginner, intermediate and maybe early advanced.
And even as a beginner plan.
We have, for example, you touched on a, a supernated curl and reverse curl, You know, so we've got,
and, you know, if you look at chess, we've got, I guess the, the straight arm flies kind of doing
similar things to the bench.
But you know, if we're getting some chess involvement, then the pullover as well, like he's kind of
got these exercises selected for, you know, different regional purposes for different muscles.
And I think that that's an interesting observation in and of itself because obviously there's this
idea that while beginners, you start with fewer exercises.
And I think there's merit to that.
I don't think a beginner, not that they shouldn't do more exercises, but obviously there's a steeper
learning curve.
So I understand why someone would start start with fewer exercises, but I find it interesting that
as a, you know, technically speaking, beginner plan to at least begin with, He had the better of the
row, but he still had reverse curls.
He still had supinated curls.
So this idea that, well, you just need, you know, a row and you don't need to do any other arm work.
It's like, well, no, not only did he have a row and arm work, he had two specific elbow flexor
exercises that were very different.
I think that's quite interesting.
And obviously the chest work as well.
You know, even the dips, like he's got the military press, a lot of people were using that as their
primary triceps exercise back in the silver era.
He's also got the dips in there.
So he's really got by and large kind of two exercises for most of the muscles that he's focusing on.
You know, obviously hams are neglected, calves are neglected to lower body, you know, a little bit
less.
But for the upper body, he's he's kind of generally doing 2 exercises per muscle.
Yeah, no, that's that's a really good point.
I mean, the fact that he did start it with, you know, such low starting weights and then take it all
the way through to, you know, something that would be superhuman.
I think is is pretty cool.
It's a really good demonstration, you know, and yet we've got people running around who will never
get close to those kind of numbers, you know, screaming that they need to periodize and, you know,
have all kinds of weird body parts splits and, you know, kind of train with various different
methods and training techniques.
And, and he's just that, you know, banging away in the background, doing the same thing all the time
and overtaking everybody.
I mean, it's, it's such a, such a great story.
I also think it's interesting where he's placed these curls.
So he's got his his pullover and then the curl and then he's got the Ben of the row and then the
curl or he's got the bench and then the fly.
And it's kind of like this, this idea we've seen repeated elsewhere.
And Dorian obviously did it as well where you kind of have that more, you know, whether it's a
single joint or whether it's a whatever, an exercise that's using less muscle mass than the exercise
before it.
He kind of has that happened a little bit here as well.
Yes, that's true.
No, I didn't see, I didn't spot that.
That's a good point.
I think this is a nice plan.
Obviously excise selection priorities are different, you know, hamstrings, cars, OK, there's stuff
here that's been neglected.
Yes, you want more back work in there, you want your pull up.
But All in all, I think this is a pretty interesting and exciting plan for someone who, you know,
pick, pick the 10 exercises that are going to do what you want them to do and just nail them.
Just do them for for years, you know?
Yeah.
And I think ultimately you've been making this point on social media recently, which is that an
exercise doesn't stop working, you know, just because you're not making very good progress on it.
It's still doing exactly the same thing that it was doing previously.
You know, you're still activating the same muscle fibers and you're still applying mechanical
tension to them.
And I think so Rob and I have talked about this on the High Performance Physiology podcast, which is
the podcast where I talk about athletic related strength training stuff, which is that I think that
people fundamentally, they don't go back to the adaptations enough.
They don't think about what's actually stimulating the adaption.
They just kind of think, you know, oh, well, I'm, I'm getting stale or they make up And that that's
a made-up word.
I mean, that literally doesn't mean anything in, in physiological terms, You know, I'm getting
stale.
I'm not, I'm not making periods.
I need to do something different.
I'm like, if what you were doing previously was working, it's still working now.
It's just that it's working incredibly slowly.
And yeah, you might want to think about adding an extra exercise in if you feel like there's growth
that you're not getting that you could be getting.
But that analysis takes place based on looking at the gaps in your program.
It doesn't start from the I mean, if you've covered all your bases, then you probably are just
fundamentally hitting a plateau and you've just got to take it very, very slowly from this point
onwards.
You know, that's just how it is.
The stimulus doesn't magically go away just because you feel like you're stale or you feel like
you're not making very much progress or you feel like something isn't working.
So I won't know.
Nothing's changed, you know, So, yeah, analyze your program and go, OK, actually, I probably should
have an extra Alberto exerciser.
I probably should have an extra back exerciser.
I probably should have an extra shoulder exercise.
Fine, not a problem.
Maybe this is the time in your training career where you want to add that in.
But, you know, if your program doesn't have those gaps, then you're just going to need to carry on
doing what you're doing.
It's just going to take more time.
And I think that's that's just really well illustrated by this program that you brought us today.
Which I wanted to use this plan because you want to talk about muscle fibers, which sound like a
pretty basic thing to talk about in a muscle Physiology podcast, but there we go.
That's where we're going to go today.
And I just thought this is a perfect opportunity to talk about this idea that this guy was hitting
the exact same muscle fibers with the exact same exercises, doing the exact same thing for four
years and it's still worked.
Nothing here stopped working.
Yeah.
So the reason I want to write muscle virus is because it's a central component of the stimulating
model that what you'll find is that most critics sort of ignore it and pretend that they haven't
heard it.
So they'll end up arguing it's like a straw man version of the model because they don't want to talk
about muscle fibers, because as soon as they talk about muscle fibers, any alternative explanation
that they've been kind of constructing just falls over completely.
So ultimately what you'll find is that at the moment there's been a movement away from, I mean, you
still find people in the fitness industry saying silly things like, you know, metabolic stress
causes hypertrophy or inflammation causes hypertrophy or, you know, self swelling causes
hypertrophy.
You still find those people and they're they're kind of dinosaurs really.
I mean, they're, they're from a forgotten age that isn't really that relevant to today's
conversations, but they do exist.
They're still out there, you know, and they're just kind of a little bit out of touch with what what
the rest of us are talking about.
But in terms of the people who are actually in the loop, what you'll find is that they all kind of
sit there on their podcasts and they'll go, oh, yeah.
You know, hypertrophy is just voting it coming to mechanical tension and then they'll stop.
And then the the problem is that people interviewing them never take the next step and go when you
say mechanical tension, where is this mechanical tension?
What's producing mechanical tension?
What specific structure is producing the tension and and what is it signalling to happen?
And what you'll get, even if you did ask those questions, you get a very hand WAVY word salad
answer.
I was going to say to be gracious.
I have heard so many of you ask those questions you wouldn't tend to.
Be.
Yeah, a little bit like laughter.
And basically they would say, Oh no, no, it's just Motine incremental mechanical tension.
So let me explain why we need to talk about muscle fibers.
We need to talk about muscle fibers producing and experiencing mechanical tension and then
responding by growing individually.
We need to have that conversation because otherwise what happens is that you kind of let these guys
get away with it.
They kind of go, oh, it's just motoring of criminal mechanical retention and they just then hand
wave themselves on to the next thing that they want to talk about.
But the reality is that you can't explain the fundamental findings of the last kind of 20 years of
hypertrophy science if you don't talk about single fibre mechanical retention.
And the reason for that is because the literature currently shows that if I do three sets of, you
know, 10 Rep Max or three sets of 25 Rep Max to failure a couple of times a week, then I should end
up after a couple of months of training.
I'm not saying you get the same result after a year of training because I do think they'll be
slightly different.
But after a couple of months of training, you're going to end up broadly in the same kind of place.
You're going to have the same muscle growth from doing, you know, three sets of 10 or even three
sets of sort of 6 to 8 versus, you know, kind of three sets of 20 to 25.
Now the problem with that is that the light load training group with 20 to 25 at Maxis is never
producing high levels of muscle force, not at any point, never there.
There's no high levels of muscle force ever being produced.
Yes, both groups are producing high levels of MOTI recruitment.
So yes, you can kind of get to the end of a set to failure and you'll be producing relatively high
levels of recruitment in both cases.
OK, I do think that light loads a little bit, kind of less on the top end than a heavier load.
But you know, it doesn't really matter for this context for a couple of months training, you're not
going to notice the difference.
So the point is that you don't get high levels of muscle force in that scenario.
You get high levels of recruitment in both scenarios, but you don't get high levels of muscle force.
So basically the question is, OK, so you you're talking about mechanical tension, but you can't have
high levels of whole muscle force, high levels of whole muscle tension.
And the problem is well, there's several problems here, but one of the problems here is that the
wider fitness industry doesn't understand that effort doesn't equal tension.
So they will get to the end of their light load strength journey set and there will be kind of, you
know, really pushing together last Rep and they've done an absolute grinder.
They've taken 5 seconds to get to the top of the Rep.
You know, the eyeballs are kind of really bulging out their heads and they go, oh wow, no, I've got
so much tension in the muscle.
I'm like, no, not really.
You, you're curling a kind of, you know, 12K dumbbell, you know, you're doing a light load set.
There's no, there's no real muscle tension there at all.
What you're feeling is the sensation of innovation, which is produced by the brain in response to
Central motor command, which is creating motuna recruitment.
So what you're feeling is effort.
So yeah, go ahead, say you're producing really high effort because you are.
Congratulations.
No, great, that's good.
But you're not actually creating or creating high levels of muscle tension.
Mechanical tension at a muscular level is still pretty low.
So when we say high mechanical tension, so you say, you know, hypertrophy is all about motunic
recruitment plus high mechanical tension, you're talking nonsense.
If you're leading people to believe that that is whole muscle tension that is doing it.
You don't have high levels of muscle tension.
You've got massive differences.
And This is why you've got, you've still got researchers running around trying to find additional
mechanisms for muscle growth.
They keep going.
Oh, well, look, you know, light loads producing, you know, low muscle tension.
Therefore we've got to have another mechanism.
We need cell swelling, we need metabolites, we need to find some reason in order to justify how
light load training produces the same hypertrophy as heavy load training.
And they can't do it.
And the reason they can't do it is because they're not thinking about single fibre tension, They
keep thinking about whole muscle tension.
And this ultimately is why we're having this conversation today about single muscle fibres is to try
and bring a little bit more light to this issue and get people to understand that the, the, the
mechanical tension that we're talking about is single muscle fibre tension.
It's got nothing to do with the entire muscle and how much force that the overall muscle produces.
Now, before I kind of pause for a moment, I just want to say one final thing on this overall kind of
framework.
We know that it's not solely high motor recruitment that causes hypertrophy.
Now this is really, really important because some people hear what I'm saying go, OK, well, if it's
not, if mechanical tension is high in the heavy load group as A at a muscle level and you know,
whole muscle force is high is low in the light load group.
So we've got a high force in the high muscle force in the heavy load group and a low muscle force in
the light load group.
But mechanical but mooting recruitment is high in both of those situations.
Is it just mooting recruitment?
Can I just activate the muscle fibers at the top end of the Moat unit pool?
I've achieved high recruitment.
I've activated all these muscle fibers.
And does that now mean that just simply activating the fibers is sufficient to make them grow?
No, it's not.
How do I know that?
We know that because light load movement like powertraining, high velocity fast movement training
also causes incredibly high levels of motion occurring probably higher than like those training to
failure.
You don't get any hypertrophy from that.
So we know and I actually, I just as like a way to kind of fix that in people's minds.
When I first proposed this idea on Twitter, as it was then, I don't know, sort of 10, 11-12 years
ago, I, I kind of said to people, it's not just recruitment and some people were pushing back on me
going, OK, well, no, I think it is just recruitment.
Just activate the fibres that you want them to grow at the top end of the routine pool and they'll
grow.
And like, no, it's not because you know of these fast movement studies that show you hit high
recruitment, but you don't actually get any muscle growth.
And I said to them, do you, do you genuinely think that it's just the amount of time that you're
spending at a higher level of recruitment that is the the determining value?
Because they were like, oh, well, you know, if you're just doing a vertical jump, a Max of a
vertical jump, then you only hit recruitment at a high level for a very short period of time.
So you need a high duration of time at high recruitment.
OK, OK, we'll jump up and down all day.
Seriously, do like enough time under you get about a second worth of a time under tension with a
vertical jump.
So do a, you know, count out the number of seconds that you're going to do for a single set to
failure.
I don't know, maybe 12 to 15 seconds.
Do do 12 to 15 Max of vertical jumps.
And tell me before you do the study, tell me you think that's going to cause the same amount of
hypertrophy as doing a set of squats, because I'm all ears.
If people genuinely think that's going to happen, then I'm all ears.
But it's not, but that's the kind of thing that you would have to do.
We actually have some animal model studies showing that, you know, that isn't what happens.
We've got some really nice animal model studies showing that you compare the same level of
activation, same, you know, kind of duration of time under activation, different velocities, which
is what I'm going to talk about next.
Therefore, different mechanical tension levels at the fiber level and you get totally different
outputs.
But that's the reason, you know, that overall kind of context is the reason I want to talk about
single muscle fiber intention today.
Does that all make sense?
It does.
At some point we needed to find some terms because people will use motor units and they will use
muscle fibers and that I think sometimes is used intentionally to confuse people on this topic.
Sure.
I mean, basically, and, and if sort of people who work in this area kind of kind of hate me when I
say this, but this is the easiest way to think about it.
Basically your motor unit is the motor neuron plus a bunch of Moss fibers stuck on the end.
So essentially you recruit switch on a motor unit and signal goes down the motor neuron and it
activates all the most fibers that are, you know, kind of connected to that motor neuron.
So essentially you've got a group of Moss fibers and that is your motor unit.
When people say, you know, oh, hypertrophy is motor unit specific, what they mean is that the muscle
fibres attached to that motor unit are all going to get the same kind of stimulus.
That's not 100% true, but let's say it is because it's more or less true.
I'm getting the kind of same stimulus when that motor unit is switched on.
So you kind of work your way on the motor unit, Paul, as you produce high levels of central motor
command in response to high levels of of effort.
And basically as you switch on motor units, every single fibre attached to that motor neuron, you
know, activates.
And so, yeah, I mean, ultimately what I'm going to defend today is that, you know, hypertrophism
fibre specific for the mechanical tension reasons, but also for the motor unit recruitment reasons.
If somebody wants to argue that hypertrophism motor units specific, they're not really saying
anything different.
They're just saying we're talking about groups of muscle fibers instead of single muscle fibers.
Arguably, if you had muscle fibers in different parts of a muscle, they're exposed to different
shortening velocities or different tension relationships, you might get different hypertrophy across
those fibers despite them being in the same motor unit.
But I'll kind of clarify all of that as we go through.
It's a jumping example you gave.
So obviously you've mentioned how it's not just the duration of those fibers being active because
you could do the jump all day or you could jump to the same amount of time as it would take you to
do a set of failure of of a leg press or whatever.
Yeah.
But there will be some.
And I know you haven't gone into mechanical tension much yet, but when you do, there will be some
mechanical tension that will be happening in those occurring in those fibers of that are active in a
vertical jump.
Is there no amount of vertical jumping where fiber is active that could accumulate enough mechanical
tension to have any significant hypertrophy stimulus?
So I think it would depend on the body weight of the person.
But you know, right at the very, very beginning of the movement you might get a tiny blip of
mechanical tension.
But the thing with Concentrix is they very, very quickly start to, you know, get to the point where
the cross bridge cycling is, is losing the the level of tension that you would need to generate
hypertroid stimulus.
But you know, we can get into that as we go through.
Sure.
So what I'd like to do is just walk through why both sarcomary genesis and transverse fibre
hypertrophy are muscle fibre specific phenomena.
And I want to do it in that order, not because it's kind of, well ultimately because it's a lot
easier based on the literature to see that sarcomerogenesis is fibre specific than it is to see that
transverse fibre hypertrophy is blue.
Now I think you can make the case very, very strong for both, but the sarcomerogenesis case is so
unbelievably slam dunk that anybody arguing the contrary really has a like a massively uphill
struggle to defend their position.
So it's useful to kind of start with sarcomerogenesis because actually you kind of having shown that
salicamergenesis is definitely fibre specific, it's kind of like, well, OK, then our default sort of
assumption for transverse fibre hypertrophy is that it will also be fibre specific because you've
just talked about how adding, you know, myofibrils on the end of a Moss fibre in the form of a new
salicamerge is fibre specific.
Why would we assume that transverse fibre hypertrophy is not?
So I think it's useful to do it this way around, even though, you know, kind of salicamergenesis is
less interesting from a kind of overall fitness industry point of view.
So when we say psychomeleogenesis, we're talking about, as I say, adding sock mares on the end of a
Moss fibre.
And typically speaking, psychomeogenesis will happen in static stretching situations, it'll happen
in eccentric training situations, and to a lesser degree it'll happen in stretch position exercise
sort of in the context of strength training as well.
So that's kind of, you know, where the where the adaptations are happening now.
A couple of years ago people were kind of screaming that there's no human studies showing sock
myogenesis happens.
We've now got those.
So they've stopped screaming about that.
I guess they'll go and scream about something else that I've said, you know, and I'm sure that'll
never really stop.
But you know, that's kind of where we are.
So starting at the beginning, sock myogenesis is one of those adaptations that has been shown to
vary depending on which region of the muscle you're looking at.
So one of my favourite researchers today, Butterfield Today's study called the magnitude of muscle
strain does not influence serial cycle number adaptations following eccentric exercise.
Now when you read that, you kind of go, oh, that sounds a bit confusing.
But the reality is what the title is alluding to is that it's muscle fibre elongation, not muscle
elongation.
So the magnitude of muscle strain does not influence serious cycle number of actions.
You can kind of see that the the title really wanted to be the magnitude of muscle fibre strain does
and the magnitude of muscle, not all muscle strain doesn't influence, but you know, obviously
they've probably got a word kind of limit.
So ultimately what it shows is that if you look at an individual muscle and how it elongates during
an eccentric contraction, different regions of the muscle elongate to lesser and greater degrees
just according to how the architecture of the muscle is arranged.
Most people have a mental image of a muscle as being like a fusiform kind of biceps muscle.
You know, they don't really think about how panation works and how it changes the way in which
different muscle fibers and different, they don't even think the muscles are compartmentalized,
which they are.
So muscles can have very, very different structures.
And I mean, like glute medius is a great example.
It's like really clearly lineated sections which are doing very, very different things from each
other.
You know, PECS probably is a better example for most bodybuilders and what they're interested in.
But if you look, and this study is really cool because what it shows is that the amount of
elongation of the individual regions, the fibres in those regions was what determined whether or not
you were going to get any sarcamerogenesis in those areas.
So you only really got additional sarcamers in the areas where muscle fibers were elongating a lot.
The whole muscle was obviously elongating, but you weren't getting the same silicon erudition in
every single fiber of the muscle.
You're only getting it in the specific region that displayed large single fiber elongations.
And I think for me, I mean, already I feel like I've built an almost insurmountable case for anybody
to argue against.
I mean, I think this colossally important study that nobody really talks about but but very, very
cool demonstration of how sarcomereidenesis is muscle fibre specific.
Is this making sense?
So.
Far.
Yep, Yep.
Cool.
The next kind of point in the, I would say really is the entire limb distraction literature.
So like most of the sarcomereidenesis literature is built on limb distraction, which is kind of
basically a surgical procedure where you put a little metal cage around a limb and you lengthen the
bone was, you know, kind of developed for, you know, kind of helping people who have limb length
discrepancies of large magnitudes.
Ultimately now I think they use it for cosmetic purposes, but you know, people who want to get
taller, but you know, it is a kind of surgical model that we use in animals, often rabbits.
And you can kind of elongate A limb.
And what you'll find is that the muscle is being elongated according to how much you kind of
elongate the cage.
And what you can do is you can see that the amount of the amount of muscle lengthening doesn't
actually determine whether or not you get Sarcome erudition.
What matters is whether or not the sarcomere length inside the muscle fibers themselves has actually
exceeded a certain threshold.
If you lengthen the muscle, but you don't pull the sarcomeres past the threshold length, nothing
happens.
But when you lengthen the muscle a little bit more and you push past that kind of threshold
sarcomex, suddenly you start getting the adaptations.
If you stop lengthening the muscle and you just leave it to the new long length, nothing happens.
You just have added all your sarcomas in series lengths have gone back to their original level
because she has a whole load of extra sarcomas in and the sarcomas now just sit there doing nothing.
Now technically you your muscle at the end of the experiment, your muscle could be like 20% longer
than it was at the beginning.
So the whole muscle now really elongated, but it's not doing anything.
It's just sitting there and you're like, OK, well, if whole muscle length and like strain is the
determining factor, then why is the muscle not adding sarcomas in series?
Because it's got nothing to do with the muscle.
It's the sarcomas that matters.
So really the distraction literature kind of goes this one step further than the Butterfield study
because it goes, OK, it's not just fiber lengthening, it's actually soccer that lengthening that
matters.
And so lengthening is really kind of the driver because it's what determines how much passive
tension you're able to create inside that single fiber.
Does that make sense?
Yeah, yeah.
So they've so you couldn't actually just assess how much a single fiber is being lengthened and
determine whether that's going to cause psychomagenesis or not.
No, you'd have to actually look at whether or not the threshold length of the individual sarcomares
within those.
And that's where the length tension relationship comes from.
And just to kind of be clear, a lot of a lot of people when they talk about length tension
relationships, they think that muscles have length tension relationships and they don't Sarcomares
have length tension relationships.
Sarcomares inside muscle fibers have length tension relationships, nothing else.
You can argue that a muscle might dis delay a kind of force length profile.
OK fine.
But strictly speaking, the actual mechanistic length and relationship comes from the individual
soccer.
And so we're talking inside the muscle fibre.
You got these bundles of myofibrils and then there's Sarkemia sections within those.
So we're talking like heaps of sarcamies within a.
Single the Sarcamer.
The Sarcamer basically is like a kind of contractile unit if you like, it's the smallest contractile
unit.
So ultimately it's going to have a specific length and if you pack more sarcomeres in series into
the muscle fibre, then each sarcomere then moves to a small length.
So you can have a muscle fibre that's really quite long.
And yet if it's got thousands of sarcomeres all in series with each other, each sarcomere can be
quite short and you'd have a relatively short kind of actual resting length.
So what you can find is that in some muscles, if you've got just really, really loaded sarcomeres in
series all the way along the muscle fibres inside that muscle, the muscle can lengthen quite a lot.
And actually you don't leave the plateau region, as we would call it, of the length tension
relationship.
And people are going, wow, you know, this muscle kind of is elongating a long way.
It must have this, you know, really pronounced intense relationship like, well, no, it doesn't
because the length tension relationship ultimately comes from the sarcoma behaviour, not from the
muscle behaviour.
And that's kind of a really important thing when it comes to comes to sarcoma.
Yep.
So in terms of kind of keeping this going, I've mentioned basically the Butterfield study, which has
regional psychomemergenesis, which shows that you're not talking about whole muscle strain.
I've talked about distraction, which shows that it's a sarcomere phenomenon.
And even within muscle fibers, you've got to be aware that that can cause things to vary.
And as I said at the end of that section, if you look at how, if you look at how the if you look at
the reason why that sarcamera is important, it's because the sarcamera is what determines the
passive mechanical tension that's being produced and experienced by the muscle fire.
Now I get a lot to push back, or I've had a lot to push back on this in the past.
People have said no, no, no, no, no.
There's all kinds of other stuff inside muscles that's producing passive tension.
I'm like, yes and no.
There is stuff inside muscles that produces passive mechanic tension.
Yes, we've got like collagen in there.
But the reality is that the Titan inside a sarcomere is what is producing most of it and it's what's
producing the relationship.
OK, So let me kind of just clarify what I mean by those two things.
It's one thing to argue the relative amounts of passive mechanical tension that you can generate
inside a muscle or not generate but experience as a result of stretching a muscle.
And it's another thing entirely to argue the shape of the relationship that we're looking at and the
shape of the relationship is really, really clearly caused by Titan.
So if you, I've got some really nice kind of studies on this, but basically if you look at the
single fibre data, you can see that the exact same shapes of passive tension versus socomer length.
So if you graph the amount of force that socomer produces as you stretch it and you kind of graph
force on the kind of Y axis and then socomer length on the X axis.
So what you should see then is just like a a kind of curve going exponentially upwards as you go,
you know, to longer and longer cyclomenics, you should find that force goes exponentially upwards.
If you can visualise that essentially you'll find that the three curves if you graph whole muscle
passive tension, intact muscle fibre tension, passive tension.
So when I say intact, I mean with the surrounding collagen, endemisium, and then if you skin that,
take the endomissium off.
So you've got no collagen at all.
So the important thing is in these three scenarios, whole muscle, you've got all the collagen you
could possibly cram into a muscle.
So it's like everywhere.
It's like not just endomissium, you've got perimissium, you've got, you know, epimissium, you've got
all kinds of fasciae, you've got everything going on.
You've even got kind of, you know, stuff in between muscle fibers that perhaps maybe shouldn't be
there from fibrosis.
You all kinds of stuff crammed into that muscle.
Then you look at intact Moss fibre, you've got the endemicium.
That's kind of all you've really got at that point.
That's actually the one that most people tend to focus on.
When they argue with me, they go, Oh no, no, I think that, you know, passive mechanical tension
comes from endemicium.
OK, fine.
And then they'll argue, OK, what about, you know, kind of skinning the Moss fibre and just removing
all the all of the endemicium as well.
So you kind of, you can look at these different scenarios, you can go, you know, each of them have
progressively less and less.
If you go from whole muscle down to kind of endometrium covered muscle fibre, intact muscle fibre
down to skin muscle fibre, you're basically kind of reducing the amount of collagen you've got from
one section to another.
And you will find that passive tension does decrease as you kind of strip out all the collagen.
But the shape of the curve is identical.
It's absolutely 100% identical.
So what that tells you is that the underlying shape of the tension relationship is actually coming
from the Titan forces, and it's the driver of the actual relationship that we see across the entire
kind of muscle versus muscle fibre spectrum all the way down to segments.
It's all coming from passive tension created by Titan.
It's not coming from other stuff like collagen.
That collagen, yeah, it's giving you a little bit of extra resistance and it's miniscule really
compared to the Titan, but it's not changing the shape.
The actual generator of kind of mechanical tension from a passive point of view when you're
stretching a fiber and stretching a whole muscle is coming from Titan.
So like I feel this is important because it kind of takes things a step further.
It goes, you know, the reason why the distraction literature shows you that there's a threshold
sarcamide length that you have to reach is because Titan is producing the passive tension that is
then stimulating Sarcamogenesis adoption that we're talking about, which is the addition of
Sarcamides on single muscle fibers.
So you know, OK, fine.
You know, not necessarily something that is, you know, as important as the previous kind of section
of the argument.
But I feel like it, it kind of does help to clarify what what is actually happening when it comes to
single fibre passive tension stimulating the addition of soccer mares on the end of that fibre.
And if you kind of just kind of round the argument off, I don't talk about myotube literature very
much.
I think that you can get yourself in a pickle with myotube literature the same way that you can get
yourself in a pickle with mtor signalling literature that we talked about last week.
If you don't really, really know what your limitations are, you can end up in situations where
you're making speculations about what's happening in vivo based on what's happening in myotubes.
And they're really not comparable.
I think that the lactate ideas of when people have done research into lactate and speculated then it
might directly stimulate hypertrophy as a way to keep the metabolic stress hypothesis alive.
I think they get into trouble with the myotube list because they don't really take into account the
limitations of what they're doing, but that's probably the best example of that going wrong.
But you can look at myotubes being subjected to mechanical loading in different directions.
You can look at them being subjected to longitudinal stretching, which is basically kind of what
would be experienced by passive kind of mechanical tension in the kind of static stretching or
eccentric training kind of situations.
Or you can get transverse loading.
So that would be kind of reminiscent of cross bridge formations that we'll talk about later.
And you know, what's really cool is that if you stretch myotubes longitudinally, they increase in
length, whereas you kind of don't do that.
You stretch them radially, you stretch them transversely.
They, they do the opposite.
They increase in, in, in diameter.
So, you know, I think that's just like a really useful way to, um, kind of again, just confirm.
I, I wouldn't, I wouldn't build a, an entire model around if that was my starting point.
But you know, it's useful just to kind of add on the end of a, a number of other observations and
say, Oh yeah.
And also the Myotube literature kind of does pretty much the same thing, you know.
So again, an interesting kind of add on.
But really for me, the region's specificity and the distraction literature are where it is most
important.
And that is then supported by the fact that the actual linked relationship shape comes from Titan,
which is kind of the thing that stimulates hypertrophy, sorry, not hypertrophy, the thing that
stimulates silicomerogenesis.
And just to be clear, we know it doesn't stimulate hypertrophy because if you look at mouse models
which have modified Titan to make it stiffer by just reducing it's length, it stimulates
sarcomogenesis, doesn't stimulate hypertrophy.
Can you just clarify those two points?
So what does it mean to simulate sarcomogenesis to be still adding parts to a muscle fibre?
How is that different to hypertrophy?
So the way that the word hypertrophy is used in the fitness industry is wrong.
It's it's used to refer to an increase in muscle mass which is not true.
The word hypertrophy refers to an increase in the diameter or a cross-sectional area of a single
muscle fiber.
You can increase muscle mass or even whole muscle cross-sectional area by adding sarcomers in
series, which is sarcomerogenesis.
So you can make a muscle fiber longer and it will either bulge out, like sort of the entire fiber
will curve away from the bone if the sarcomer lengths stay the same, if sarcomer lengths shorten so
that each sarcomer is now resting at short length, what you'll find is that the actual muscle fiber
now increases radially without adding myofibrils in parallel.
Because what you've done, if you think about it, you've just squeezed a tube kind of to a, to a sort
of shorter length.
It's got to bulge out sideways.
So that kind of causes all kinds of problems in measurement situations.
But yeah, basically Soccer Genesis is adding contractor material on the end of a fibre hypertrophy
is adding contractor material inside the existing soccer mares that are already there and just
making those kind of larger, you know, outwards, which is radially.
Yeah, yeah.
But like you said, both.
Can you just send an increase in CSA?
Oh, whole muscle CSA, absolutely.
I mean ultimately single, I think that's sock measures can make single muscle fibers appear larger
in terms of CSA as well.
If you don't normalise the length tension relationships when you measure them.
That's the problem.
If you, if you don't, if you, if you take two muscle fibers and you keep them the same hole muscle
fibre length as in, and I say that that's not in physiological terms, that's actually in numerical
terms.
So if you've got like A5 centimetre muzzlevir and you keep it 5 centimetres and you add sarcomers in
series and you keep them both 5 centimetres, what you'll find is that the sarcomers in series will
force the muscle fibre to bunch up and it'll let them getting bigger.
And that's just just kind of geometry.
That's not any other kind of complicated kind of physiological explanation.
That's just geometry.
The problem is that a lot of physiologists tend to, when they refer to muscle fibre length, they
tend to assume that you've normalised the sarcomares for their, you know, kind of standard lengths.
So you, you, you're just kind of measuring, you know, the, the new muscle fibre and you've, you've
normalised it.
So actually you'll end up with a longer muscle fibre by adding more sarcomares in series.
OK.
I think that's an important point because it is, I don't know if you hear this much, but it is an
argument against how all this works and against passive tension and against sarcomeogenesis is if it
was sarcomeogenesis, we wouldn't be seeing increases in CSA because it's not hypertrophy.
So those two things kind of get equated for some reason.
Yeah, I mean the the Hornberger lab did a really good analysis showing geometrically that if you add
sarcomares in series then you will actually automatically increase whole muscle cross-sectional
area.
I mean, you know, I mean, anybody who wants to go up and argue against those guys is welcome to do
that.
But you know, just be aware that they're pretty much at the top of their game.
I don't, I don't think, you know, kind of messing around so geometrically you would kind of already
get to that conclusion if you just thought about it.
But they've gone actually done a proper analysis to show that it does actually happen.
So yeah, psychoagenesis will increase home muscle mass.
It definitely also increases home muscle cross-sectional area.
Hypertrophy is not an increase in all muscle cross-sectional area or an increase in all muscle mass,
even though we use it like that unconventionally, incorrectly.
Technically fibre hypertrophy is what we should be talking about, which is the increasing.
I mean, ultimately, just to be clear, you can get muscle mass increases and cross section area
increases from hyperplasia in a whole bunch of animal models and probably a little bit in humans as
well.
And that's definitely not hypertrophy.
So again, you know, we need to just be, if people want to have the arguments at these levels of
detail, they probably need to adopt the correct terminology.
I'm I'm sympathetic to people who just want to call, you know, like, Oh yeah, if you want a
hypertrophy, your glutes and you need to do these exercises, I'm not going to argue with those
people.
I'm not sure.
Oh no, you should be using that.
No, I'm not going to argue with them.
That's that's silly.
That's, that's just being picky for the sake of making, you know, kind of a point.
What I'm saying is that if you want to argue about self emergency, you know, and hypertrophy and
those kind of things, then you need to be adopting the terminology.
I think at this point I've been guilty of not doing that in the past.
But I think really the point we are in the fitness industry now where people have a pretty good base
understanding.
Although there's a lot of kind of weirdnesses around where people are kind of arguing about things
that don't exist because they've heard second and third and 4th and 5th hand versions of things
that, you know, other people like me have created.
Then you kind of you end up in a bit of a weird situation.
But yeah, I think really if you want to have this conversation, you need to be separating out fiber
hypertrophy from psychogenesis and understand geometrically that both of those can cause an increase
in hole muscle cross-sectional area.
Cool.
So that is really all I wanted to say about soccer myogenesis.
I think that's AI think that is a really strong case for arguing that soccer myogenesis is happening
on a single muscle fibre level.
I think, you know, mechanistically and the date that we've got make it pretty much undeniable that
is that is what is going on.
And so really the next thing that I would then go on to talk about is then say, well, OK, it is
muscle fibre hypertrophy, a single fibre phenomenon.
Now this is really important because ultimately what we're saying then is that if you if you say
that.
So I think there are two starting hypothesis.
You are the hypothesis.
And when I say hypothesis I literally mean hypothesis.
I'm not talking about like models or anything like that.
I'm literally just saying hypothesis.
I think you either start with a hypothesis that hypertrophy is muscle fibre specific.
And when I say that, what I mean is the same way that sarcomo genesis is fibre specific, which is to
say the hypertrophy happens both because the fibre produces tension and then experiences that and
then tells that single fibre to grow.
That's the fibre specific model.
The other hypothesis you can start from I think is that you've got a whole muscle phenomenon whereby
you say, OK, there is some kind of tension being detected at the whole muscle level, like at the
tendon.
And that then I, I've actually had conversations with people who've argued that there is a, there
are receptors, I mean there are tension receptors at the tendon, but that's beside the point.
They argue those kind of tension receptors at the tendon could then back talk to the muscle fibres
and tell them to grow as a result of the whole muscle tension.
Now this this hypothesis, I think dies immediately when you look at the like those strength training
to failure literature.
That's what I said when I introduced this entire conversation.
I said, if you start by the hypothesis that you think whole muscle tension is somehow triggering
muscle growth, then you basically have to stand in front of, you know, the amazing work done by a
whole bunch of kind of dedicated hyperture research for the last 20 years and say, well, I think all
your work is nonsense, which obviously is not really true.
So you can't say like those strength training failure literature is, you know, is valid.
And then at the same time you can say, oh, well, you know, I think it's whole muscle tension that's
causing hypertrophy of individual fibers.
You just can't do that.
So I think that's that's really the kind of the starting point of of where this entire conversation
kind of comes from.
But if I kind of go through the same points that I went through with psychomagenesis, with
psychogenesis, I started out by saying look, we've got this Butterfields today that shows regional
kind of psychomodosis is happening as a result of reasonable fibre strains.
Can you do that with single fibre hypertrophy?
Well, not really, but you can get relatively close.
So what you, what we can't do is look at obviously single fibre forces in vivo.
You can't really do that.
But what you can look at is single fibre activations.
And the reason that's not actually as bad as it sounds is that we know that the primary driver of
single fibre force from a cross bridge point of view is the force velocity relationship.
So essentially when a muscle fibre is shortening at a slow speed, you are going to get a relatively
high single fibre force.
If it's shortening at a faster speed, you can get a really slow, really low level of force.
Now other people kind of go on and I know we, we want to talk about force, you know, kind of length
relationships, length translations, We want to talk about recoding and that kind of stuff.
Like, OK, cool.
But those factors are really tiny compared with force velocity.
They, they do make a difference.
But honestly, if you just look at the magnitude of the force velocity relationship, it obliterates
everything else.
So if you're moving slowly, you're going to find that the fibre is producing high force recoding
really doesn't change that much in the in the context of the movement velocities that you're going
to get in strength training.
If you go from a normal strength training repetition, even though Max effort repetition at a, you
know, and fatigue in a non fatigue state so that you're doing a 10 minute Max and you move the
weight as fast as possible, you're still not moving that very quickly.
You know, you compare that with your last repetition.
There is a difference, but it's not like massive if you compare that heavy strength training
repetition with like a fast movement, like a throw.
The velocities are just are utterly, completely and utterly different.
So you know, there's there's a huge range of possibilities that you can get on the force velocity
spectrum that are bigger than that we see even in the context of strength.
So basically we've got a situation where force velocity is determining the is the major determinant
of cross bridge mechanical tension and cross bridge mechanical tension.
As I say, what you can see is that activation of the fibre, and if you assume that all fibres are
shortening roughly at the same kind of speed, depending on the Rep that you're doing, you're going
to find that activation whether the fibre is activated or not.
And then can therefore probably use cross bridges is the primary determinant of whether those fibres
are going to experience the mechanical tension they need in order to grow.
And we do have relatively good data mapping regional activation to regional growth after strength
training.
It's not done with EMG, it's done with MRI scans, but it is actually still measuring the activation
in specific readings of a muscle and showing that it does associate with long term growth after
training with exactly the same exercise.
So you can broadly see that the sarcomereogenesis conversation that we started with, where they got
the really good data from the butter pillar study is mapped across into strength training.
Not as accurately because you can't measure the fibre tension the way you can measure fibre strains,
but you can see regional activation tracking and doing the same thing as long term hypertrophy.
OK, I'm, I'm trying to think, you know, there's, there's a lot going on here and hopefully people
are keeping up.
But you know, so far it's, I'm, I'm trying to play devil's advocate and it's hard to, it's hard to
actually argue.
Well, how could it be anything other than at a fiber level like.
No, I know.
If we know that's where mechanical tensions occur, we know where that's where, you know, stretch is
occurring.
It's like I don't even know how to argue the opposite at this point.
I I think that that really what's happening, as I said at the very beginning, what's happening is
that people who are, are arguing with the stimulating that's model as I've presented it
physiologically, what they do is they pick a couple of things highlights that they can argue with.
Like maybe they'll argue with the fact that I've said in the past, I think it's, you know, kind of
five reps, the last five reps to failure.
It's probably the stimulator.
And they'll pick that and they'll just say, well, that's the stimulating reps model.
No, it's not.
That's just the kind of the output number that I think is most likely to reflect what's going on.
The stimulating reps model is a physiological model that says muscles will grow when you hit high
levels of recruitment, so that lots of fibres are activated and those fibres are each experiencing
high levels of tension because the muscle as a whole is shortening slowly.
If you get those two things to work at the same time, then you'll end up with hypertrophy stimulus
across the whole muscle.
That's the stimulus model.
How do you get there?
Well, you get there because metabolite related to fatigue largely just slows muscle fibres down and
that's largely the primary fatigue mechanism and like those strength training affairs.
So you don't really get reductions in mechanical tension at the fibre level that you would expect to
get as a result of other fatigue mechanisms.
So ultimately that's how the stimulating model explains the light load strength train to failure
literature versus heavy load strength train to producing the same muscle growth over time.
Everybody else just waves their hands in the air.
They just go, well, it's motinico mechanical tension.
I'm like, OK, now take the next step and tell me where the tension is coming from.
Because I guarantee if you do that, you will then actually have to stop thinking and you'll end up
in this physiological model that I've created.
You won't actually be able to explain it in any other way.
If you reject it outright and you say, well, no, I think it's whole muscle tension, then you are
absolutely in big trouble because now you'd like those traction in literature just smashed you in
the face and says, no, you're wrong.
So I think what they've got themselves into is a a bit of a, a dead end because they kind of they
don't want to come out to the dead end and say, actually, no, Chris is right because they'd lose a
massive amount of phase to do that.
But they can't extract themselves in any other way.
So they're just going to sit there and pretend that they've got arguments and they don't.
They don't have any arguments.
They're just kind of, you know, waving hands around and just saying tension and recruitment without
actually telling you what is going on because they can't.
Anyway, I don't want to rant about other people because it's not really the purpose.
I want to walk through how this stuff actually works.
So as I said, you can track the same kind of arguments through from psychological genesis as you can
with the kind of the hypertrophy stuff, fiber hypertrophy stuff.
Interesting.
We've got a couple of important other blocks in this in this kind of argument.
One of which is that if you are looking at Nosafibre growth in developmental situations or you know,
kind of maybe even in in myotubes, if you stop actin myosin kind of across British from actually
forming, then you end up not having my fibrillar edition.
So if you're kind of looking at a growth situation, as I say, either you're growing myotubes or
you're looking at, you know, it's kind of sort of in vitro Moss fires in some other way.
You're trying to make the the kind of the structures grow, then you can activate them.
That's not too difficult to do.
If you block active myosin kind of formations, even though the fibres are activated, you don't get
them.
My Fibrillar edition, I think that's a really good kind of sense check on the fact that the cross
bridge formations is the thing that we're looking for.
Or to stimulate my free audition.
A lot of people kind of go, well, no, it's just activation.
Well, we've had this conversation by the beginning of our episode today.
It's not just activation.
You can show that by looking at the hyper velocity work.
But if you really needed a like granular sense check that it is cross bridge formations that matter,
just look at the literature blocking those and you'll find that even activation won't do like
purchase stimulus.
You need the cross bridge formations to be able to get that next step.
So I think that's a good sense check.
So you, you made a point a while ago you said and if you're using say AA10 Rep Max load or or
heavier, there's going to be immediately there's gonna be some reduction in velocity, right?
Like compared to very, very light loads, Yeah, but that's going to the, I guess reduction in
velocity is going to increase obviously the heavier it goes.
And then we're gonna see more mechanical 10s tension at a fiber level, the heavier and therefore
slower than that contractions occurring.
Now if you were to use say an 8 to 10 Rep Max load, so there's not very SHO slow shortening
velocity, but there's some reduction in shortening velocity and you were to perform that with a Max
effort.
So you were actually trying to perform that velocity as quick as possible.
So there was as much mode unit recruitment as possible.
Could you potentially get some some stimulus in those higher threshold mode units?
But it may just be very small amounts in that situation.
Yeah.
I mean, it's the same comment that we that I made when I talked about the vertical jump.
Yeah, right at the very beginning.
You might get a little bit right there at the very beginning.
Yeah.
I mean, ultimately the physiological model, the stimulating rates model is, is kind of it's, it's a
map of the territory, but the map isn't the territory, you know.
So this model is designed to give you a framework that physiologically largely explains where it
does explain what's going on.
But yeah, you'll find situations where it's like, oh, well, because you have to accelerate.
Yeah.
You will have that little bit of slow movement velocity right at the beginning of the repetition
where you've got that little bit of, you know, kind of tension which does go above the threshold
necessary to trigger the hypertrophy.
Yeah, you will.
Physiology is messy.
The framework we're working with is messy.
This map that I've got is the simplest kind of like explanation that works for, you know, as much of
the thing as possible without completely, you know, getting to a complete a level of complication
that that is just makes it unusable.
So, you know, I think, yeah, you could get that kind of trailing edge.
And, you know, I've been through the kind of reps to failure, the reps and reserve literature
before.
And you can find little studies here and there that kind of make it look like maybe you've got kind
of a bit of hypertrophy happening at 8 reps and reserve or 7 reps reserve occasionally.
And it's like, well, yeah, that's probably what that is.
Does that mean you're now going to change your entire training model to train 7 or 8 reps and
reserve?
No, yeah, it's the the the.
No, I think.
And the model still track.
It's just, yeah, you know, people are just looking for little tiny bits of areas where they can
criticize me because.
Yeah.
That sounds like a Duchess, really.
Yeah, totally.
No, I think where there's potential, something that's interesting in this I think is when we look at
obviously atrophy and obviously we see that occurs very quickly, you know, over the course of a
week, we don't really know how small amount of stimulus is needed to prevent that atrophy, right?
Like as soon as there's sort of any hypertrophy stimulus, I guess we almost buy ourselves this sort
of protection window.
So I just wonder, are there opportunities with Max effort work if we do have activation even with
small amounts of mechanical tension at a fiber level, is there potential for that to actually sort
of stave off some of this atrophy?
Yeah.
So I mean, basically that would be kind of like saying, well, you know, if I've been doing heavy
squats, you know, through the offseason, can I, can I get away with jump squats in season?
I mean, that would be the athletic way of looking.
At.
And I think that's a really interesting point.
I've always been interested in that as a concept.
I kind of suspect that I, I kind of suspect that the answer will displease both me and, and anybody
who's arguing against me really.
I think it'll end up being a bit of a lukewarm kind of answer.
I, I don't think it will be fully protective.
I, I think that you would probably end up having to do quite a lot of jump squats make that work.
And I think you'd probably end up with a confounding effect of silk merogenesis happening from the
landing phase as being super maximally centrix.
So I think it would be quite difficult to do in that content.
You probably need to figure out a kind of concentric only variation to make that work like press
type thing.
I don't know, but it's something that I have thought about in the past.
I think it's, it's a totally valid point.
So if you kind of can get to a, you know, maybe sort of training three times a week with some power
training type activities, you might be able to get a kind of enough of a stimulus to keep at Bay.
Obviously you'd end up doing a bunch more reps than you would have done if you'd just done, you
know, kind of single serve squad twice a week.
Yeah, totally.
Yeah.
So in terms of keeping this kind of single fiber hypertrophy model going, as I said, you know,
starting with the idea that, you know, hypertrophy does appear to be regional the same way that's
all of my genesis is regional.
We do have kind of a sense check showing that you do need to have cross pre activation, cross pre
formation, sorry, not just activation in order to create hypertrophy.
And really it what it comes down to though the kind of the slam dunk in this in this sequence is the
study that came out around about the time that I was putting the model together called increased
hypertrophic response with increased mechanical load in skeletal muscles receiving identical
activity patterns. 201516 study.
Basically it's a rodent study where they did identical activations with electrical stimulus maximize
kind of Titanic contractions of muscles with Rhen's under anesthesia.
And they, as I say, matched the total activation.
But one group was experiencing isometric contractions and the other was experiencing high velocity
contractions.
Now I've talked on the Athletic Kind of strength Training podcast about how calcium ion accumulation
is what determines fibre type shifting and I'll explain that comes from the calcium ions that are
stimulated by the activation.
So ultimately it's really cool.
This study showed that both groups experiencing same activation durations experienced the same fibre
type shifts but totally different hypertrophy.
Only the slow movement velocities caused hypertrophy.
So what you can see is that this is one of those amazing studies that shows you you've got a
velocity dependent response despite activations being absolutely identical and fibre type shifting
being up to identical.
A lot of people tend to assume that fibre type shifts kind of just come along for the ride with
hypertrophy.
It's not true.
They're absolutely 100% separate adaptations started by completely a separate stimuli.
So for me that really is kind of the slam dunk.
And you know, if you then go back to the PSC stuff on sort of muscle fibre kind of signifier force
in force velocity kind of experiments, you can see that the actual cross bridge formations are
changing number of attached cross bridges are changing according to velocity.
So faster the the movement velocity, the faster the Moss fire has to shorten.
And what you'll find is that the number of cross bridges that remain attached to anyone time
decreases because the detachment rate increases.
So basically the fibre, the sorry, the cross bridges are coming off earlier than they would do if
you're moving more slowly.
And that really just kind of explains the link between the force velocity relationship and the
actual mechanical tension that the individual Moss fire has been experienced.
And I've seen so many people, not so many, I suppose really, because I tend to just watching when I
when I get send them by Rob, but Rob Rob sends me videos to torn and I've sort of kind of clicked on
them and I just navigate away because I can see what the problem is straight away.
But so many people like want to argue about the false relationship is not just about, you know,
cross bridge formations, but it, it, it pretty much is.
There's a few other bits and pieces going on if you want to kind of look at whole kind of multi
joint exercises.
But when you're looking at like sort of muscles, really it just comes down to cross bridge
formations.
That's that's really what matters.
So it's really cool.
We've got the PSSC literature explaining mechanistically you know, how that velocity is affecting
the mechanical tension produced by a single muscle virus.
So we can see that as the velocity tapers down towards the end of the cells, we get storage and so
we get higher recruitment because of the effort increasing, we get the velocity loss as well to
metabolite accumulation and we end up producing higher muscle fibre forces through more cross
bridges attaching at any more moment in time.
In any case, anyone missed, you did say there.
So if you are intentionally slowing down the velocity, well then that's going to be a reduction in
effort.
So there's going to be fewer Modi units that are going to be recruited in that.
So you can't just be like.
Yeah, I mean, very slow kind of time and attention, guys, isn't it?
I mean, they're still around today.
I mean, I don't.
I think sometimes what happens is, you know, people who don't really know very much about how the
Physiology works behind strength training, they kind of find something that somebody was talking
about years ago and they go, Oh yeah, now this, this idea is great.
I should reintroduce it and maybe people will follow me on the Internet.
I'm like, OK, if the only thing you're interested in is people following on the Internet, great.
But honestly, there's literally no physiological reason why you would assume that slowing down a
repetition is going to do anything.
If you know how Central Motor Command is related to effort, you're just dropping protein equipment
levels.
As you just said, it's not going to get you where you want to go, but I don't really want to focus
too much on recruitment because I think today is about why single muscle fibre tension, both from a
passive point of view, an active point of view in form of cross bridge formations is important to
consider in the context of the stimulating its model.
We've got to talk about how tension is fibre specific because that's the only way that the kind of
the people who are arguing against the model will understand or be encouraged to understand.
It's probably a better way of putting it.
Be encouraged to understand that they are not being what's the right word.
They are not.
They are not clearly delineating their position in opposition to the stimulating model.
They are just bleating complaints and not actually being specific about what those complaints are.
You know, so when they complain about 5 repetitions or when they complain about how it's, you know,
it's just tension and recruitment, you know, there's nothing more complicated than that.
Well, no, it is quite a lot more complicated than that because you have to defend which hypothesis
you want to go with.
Do you want to say that it's homeless force?
In which case you are going to an uphill struggle with the light load strength training to failure
literature or are you actually going to go down the single fibre route?
In which case you've got to do what I've just done in this podcast and explain why you think that's
happening and how it's happening and what that then means for Muscle Red.
Because one of the things that we got unravelled in, one of the arguments we got unravelled in,
probably the biggest argument I think we've been unravelled in was the neuromechanical matching
argument.
Where basically we've been pointing out that because hypertrophy is muscle fibre specific, you
actually are going to end up needing a couple of exercises to maximise muscle growth.
And you're going to need to know which exercises targeting which regions.
And the best way to do that is neuro mechanical matching.
Now a lot of people argued against neuro mechanical matching is the thing, which is just silly
because it's pretty much the only model that exists.
And a lot of other people have argued against the idea that different exercises are indeed targeting
different muscle fibres, which again, you know, is pretty silly.
But ultimately different regions of a muscle are going to have different muscle fibres in them.
And you're going to find that because hypertrophy muscle fibers specific, which what I've been
talking about today, you're actually going to be training different fibers and just kind of saying,
oh, well, no, I'm training the muscle or no, you're not.
You're training muscle fibers.
That's why I keep saying to people, you're never training a muscle, You're always training muscle
fibers.
The fact that one muscle fibre in a muscle is being trained and, and another muscle fibre, if it's
not being activated and loaded, doesn't know, it's got no idea that you're doing that.
And that's really coming back to what we've talked about today.
It's why it's so important.
Yeah.
I mean, ultimately, the only reason this is still an argument is because people want to defend
splits.
They want to defend not doing full body ultimately, and you know, becomes the argument, well,
there's a crossover stimulus.
You know, you're doing, you're doing your back work and you're doing a pullover and you're getting
some chest work in.
There you go, chest.
Activation, some chest activation, some chest work.
So that that's that word sum is doing so much work.
It's like, oh, you're getting sum.
OK, what does sum mean?
What does sum mean?
And people think, oh, it means that OK, the fibres are experiencing as small as impossible.
The magnitude of stimulus can be determined by the force velocity relationship.
If the fibre is activated in the 1st place.
And that's the problem because people go, oh, well, it's just a smaller stimulus, so they can kind
of be kept going.
No, you're not thinking properly.
If the fibre is not activated, it might as well be in a completely different part of the body.
Yeah, it's like they might as well be saying, oh, I'm doing, I'm doing a chest day, therefore my
calves are getting some stimulus exactly because I'm standing on the ground.
I'm like, what are you talking about?
Yeah, you know.
Yeah, yeah, there's no actual logic to that argument because, you know, obviously you look at
something like the chest in that example and you've got shoulder flexion and extension.
It's like, well, half of the chest is doing one thing, the other half is doing the other.
You can't possibly argue if I just do one of those joint actions, the whole chest is somehow going
to, you know, not experience atrophy.
Yours all going to experience hypertrophy.
Like there's just, it just doesn't make any sense.
But that becomes when people accept ultimately, oh, OK, it has to be things have to be happening at
a fibre level or, you know, there has to be whatever atrophy occurring in a week or, you know, based
on the maintenance literature or, you know, whatever, people will pick up one point and be like, OK,
I have to concede that point.
But now I need to still find a way to make all this other stuff work.
And that's why we then end up seeing people argue, well, actually maybe every exercise is causing
maximal activation in that muscle, right?
And you know, I'm seeing people now argue, well, the exercise variation is just for enjoyment.
They, they have to, yeah, they have to work backwards from what their, their desired answer is to,
to then find justifications.
So they start arguing silly things like, I mean, the whole we've, I've done, we've done a whole
podcast on how no unit equipment is not maximal in strength training exercises.
And I don't want to repeat it here, but you know, there's a really, really good episode on this, but
it's not an argument.
It isn't.
You cannot claim that you've got 100% motine recruitment at the end of a strength training set in
the muscle that you are using.
It's absolutely 100% impossible to make that claim if you literally just look at the voluntary
activation data and then work backwards from that, deducting all the reasons why dynamic strength
training in a gym is going to involve lower recruitment than the tests in dynamometers.
You know, dynamometry gives you kind of numbers of 80 to 95%, which is, you know, showing a clear
deficit of on activation clear.
You know, you haven't got full recruitment.
If you then work backwards and go, OK, well, those are done in very stable situations with single
muscles in single joint situations.
If I work backwards from that and I've got, you know, less stable because I'm, I'm not strapped to a
chair, I've got laughing because there are actually some science based lifters who pretty much do
strap themselves to a chair at this point.
But you know, you kind of work backwards from that and say, OK, well, I'm, I'm not strapped to a
chair.
I'm using more than one arm or leg at a time.
I'm doing kind of, you know, multi joint rather than single joint.
And he work backwards from that and deduct the fact that you're going to lose recruitment for every
one of those things that you do.
You're ending up in a situation where you're a lot less, you've got a lot less activation at Max
effort than you would have, you know, kind of and certainly nowhere close to 100%.
But as you say, people go, oh, well, you know, I can't make my way of training sound justified
unless I, you know, remove this particular observation.
Therefore, I'm just going to argue it's observation.
And because people just kind of want to follow that person, they just believe it.
It's wild.
So I don't know if you've got anything else you want to say about the single fiber stuff, but if
you're finished with that, maybe what we can conclude with is a bit more kind of rapid fire.
What's the application or the the actual practicality part of if hypertrophy is fiber specific, what
are some things that means?
So, you know, obviously we've touched on a few so far, but if we could just run through some of
those.
Well, the biggest 1 really is, well, leaving aside the fact that it explains how the literature
works, which nobody else can do, you know ultimately if you say that.
Which is important one.
So ultimately you're saying, well, actually the.
Reason I built the model.
I built the model to explain how the light load strength training literature works.
You know, I mean, ultimately we've got this really important.
I mean, I was, I was kind of, you know, thinking about all this stuff at the same time as
researchers were doing studies showing that three sets to failure with eight, you know, 8 to 10 reps
or 20 to 25 reps produced same hypertrophy.
And people were running around, you know, waving their hands in the air, you know, screaming that
there had to be something, you know, kind of metabolic stress going on because whole muscle forces
were different.
And they're right, whole muscle forces are different.
And I was like, well, hang on a minute, is hypertrophy a whole muscle phenomenon or is it a fibre
specific phenomenon?
And that was it, that was the start for the whole model.
And like 10 years later, people still can't bring themselves to say it because as soon as they say
it, they're going to have to go down the same route that I went down.
They're going to end up in the same place as me.
And they don't want to do that now because they've got ego demands in the in the equation because
they didn't figure it out.
Therefore it can't be right.
So but yeah, ultimately the the big reason to kind of think about it is because it explains that
literature and nothing else.
We really can't do that while maintaining the observations that everybody is making, which is that
the only things that matter hypertrophy are recruitment and tension.
OK, well then where is the tension?
Is it the whole muscle or is it the single fiber?
Because as soon as you say single fiber, you're going to end up having the same set of thought
processes that I've just gone through today and you end up with the stimulating Rats model.
So yeah, I think that's really the big the big deal.
And then everything else just kind of follows from there.
So.
But if you think that fiber is, if you think the hypertrophys fiber specific, then the big two
things that matter then are firstly, neural mechanical matching is going to tell you or whatever
other motor control model you want to cook up.
But you know, neural mechanical matching is the only one that has any kind of validity.
It's only one that's really been tested.
So I know that people are still bashing it, but there's like 9 or 10 studies in humans or showing
that it is validated.
So I don't really know why people are so exercised about it, but you know, so you know, I'm matching
it.
As I say, it's going to tell you which exercises training which muscle regions.
But the point of muscle fibers, particularly hypertrophy, is that we do have to train individual
muscle fibers.
And that means that you do need to have a number of exercises in your program if you want to capture
the entirety of muscle growth that you've got available to you.
Now, if you don't want to do that, if you're just quite happy with a lower level of total growth and
you just want to, you know, bang away on four or five exercises, that's absolutely fine.
It's just that you've set a different goal.
But if you want to reach the peak of bodybuilding, natural bodybuilding, sorry, to be clear, then
you're probably going to need at least sort of 12 exercises, probably more than that.
You know, I think that's the important, that's probably the really big practical application.
And I think that's one of those things that gets a lot of people a bit aggravated.
Carrying on from that, you can then immediately go well, OK, So given that we know that from the
maintenance that atrophy happens relatively quickly, you know within a few days of leaving the
hypertrophy stimulus period, then you are also going to need to do those exercises with a relatively
high frequency.
And that's the one that I think is really sticking in people's kind of, and it's really causing
problems for people at the moment.
I think that's the one that they're rejecting.
No, no, no, no.
I want to, I want to do, you know, kind of upper, lower, kind of sort of four total workouts a week
to, to upper, to lower.
And I want to do different exercises in each workout.
I'm like, well, good luck.
Because you're going to need to do 3 or 4 kind of sets just to stay pretty much static if you do
that, because you basically train the same Moss fibres, you know, only only kind of once a week, at
least at the top end of the Motina pool.
Because different mossifiers are going to get used in different exercises unless you're literally
doing this sort of a machine exercise and a free weight variation that's basically the same.
I mean, OK, fine.
I mean, that's, that's not what I'm talking about.
But if you're doing like a wide.
But then that's easy.
Back to the first point where you need more exercises if you go to maximize the growth in a given.
Muscle yeah.
So it's not really going to work out that well, but basically some people are going no, no, no, I
want to do, you know, I want to do my pull ups on that day and I want to do my kind of rows on the
other day and I'm like, well you know I don't want to do 11 of each one set of each on both days.
I'm like, well then you're going to find that you're kind of pretty much just spinning your wheels
the whole time then.
You've turned them into the same exercise because anything unique about that exercise you've you're
you're losing by the time you do that exercise.
I wouldn't phrase it.
I know why.
I know why you said that.
I wouldn't phrase it quite like that because I think you're overselling it.
I would.
I would say you've, you've not turned them into the same exercise.
You've turned them into a, the much worse version of.
One of the exercises, the lowest common denominator.
Almost.
Between the lowest common denominator, yeah, is what's what's getting trained, Nothing else is
getting trained.
So if you pick two exercises that are have some pretty good overlap, you know, I don't know, maybe
you've got a bench press that's not quite fully transverse plane.
It's got a little bit of kind of, you're kind of moving towards this edge of the plane as most
people do because it's more comfortable, you know, and then you do a family on the other day.
So you're doing a bench press, which is kind of somewhere between the size of the plane and the
transverse plane and you're doing a, a kind of a fully transverse plane fly.
You're going to have basically a kind of somewhere in between exercise is going to be what you end
up with the lowest common denominator between those two.
It's probably not the end of the world.
In contrast, if you were doing a wide grip pull up and a narrow grip row, you'd be pretty stuffed
because those two are training completely different parts of the back.
So I think it really depends on which kind of level of variation you're talking about.
Yeah, yeah.
And so as, as I say, I think practically the first thing that you kind of come across is exercise
selection is really important.
The second thing you come across is that frequency of exercise selection is also really important.
You can't just kind of stick the exercises any way you like during the week.
You actually need to be doing them a little bit more frequently.
And that really starts to create issues for people who want to make really creative looking
programmes.
And let's come back to the Alan Stephen issue really, which is that a really good programme is
pretty much going to look really, really boring.
And a lot of what gets sold is really good programming today is basically just entertainment, which,
you know, is paralleling what you, I mean, I've made this comment in a previous podcast and I got
absolutely hammered for it.
I said most of what people are doing today when they talk about educating themselves, they're just
basically entertaining themselves watching people argue about stuff on, you know, kind of TikTok or
Instagram and not really learning how things work.
Like one of them how things work with the FAQ.
You don't you just kind of want to entertain yourself kind of arguing about something that you don't
really understand yet because you haven't done the work to understand it.
And I got absolutely hammered for that.
I'm probably having it saying it again, but it's basically the same thing that you're seeing in
programming.
People want a really entertaining, kind of exciting looking program that's changing all the time.
And it's like Alan Stephen absolutely, you know, destroys your kind of progress with his four years
of doing the same thing.
It's good.
Like that's just the I think that's the challenge that we've got with.
I mean, obviously human nature doesn't change, but I think social media tends to facilitate some of
the worst tendencies that we have in wanting novelty and excitement and instead of actually just
sitting down and grinding to the work that needs to get done.
But again, you know, if if that upsets people, then, you know, just kind of, you know, treat me as
old man yells at Cloud and and ignore that bit, you know.
Well, with with the programming, I have thought to myself before if no one ever sold programming
like if that just if we just lived in a world where that didn't happen, how would these programs
look different?
And I just think they would look.
Like a students.
Program exactly.
And what would happen is you would get like one exercise that would change here or there.
Maybe someone would add in an exercise like it would just be this slow evolution of a singular
program.
We just, we would not end up with these silly, you know, four week phases where you're doing
completely different things every time.
Yeah.
I mean, like even to the point where I actually had this thought yesterday in my home gym.
I've got all these unique pieces of equipment.
I've got all, you know, 30 different specialty bars and all this stuff.
I don't use 95% of it.
And I think to myself, you, you wouldn't, there's no need to use this stuff unless you're going to
find the best bar for the whatever exercise and you're going to keep that exercise in forever or
more or less ever.
There's no value to all this variety.
The variety is there to find the best of that thing and keep it.
You don't change it.
And, you know, obviously I had a different mindset when I set up my home gym because I've, you know,
got all this other stuff.
But, you know, you look at these, you go back to the first point you brought up where it's like,
hey, well, if you want to maximally develop an ex a muscle, you'll need at least a couple of
different exercises for that muscle.
And then the second point you made was, well, you need to be doing them relatively regularly and you
can't just drop them out.
Like those things are in for good now.
And you go back to Alan's plan.
Yeah.
OK, Two exercises for his high priority muscles.
And he did them three times a week for years.
That's what it ends up looking like.
Exactly, exactly, You know, I think anyway that's I don't I don't want to kind of get too rampanty.
I'm as I'm going to get hammered for this anyway, So, you know, we are where we are.
But the, the last thing I want to kind of probably add as, as a big rock item that kind of follows
from the observation that I purchased most probably specific, is that now you can look at fatigue
mechanisms and predict exactly how they're going to cause problems for you in your strength training
programs.
Yeah, because now you can go, OK, So what do your fatigue mechanisms actually do?
Well, you've got kind of four main categories of fatigue mechanisms.
You've got 2 CNS mechanisms and you've got two groups of peripheral mechanisms, CNS.
You've got superspinal and spinal.
Basically all they do is they gradually reduce access to the highest threshold motor units and work
their way down the Hanneman size principle.
So you're basically just going to switch off motor units at the top and work your way downwards.
And that is going to then obviously stop those Moss fires from experiencing any mechanical tension
because they won't be activated and you won't get those fibres experiencing hypertrophy.
Now, people who've listened to that explanation and they've listened to my work before going to be
going, well, yeah, obviously I'm like, well, yeah, but it's not obvious for people who are sitting
on the opposite side of the fence going, well, we think whole muscle tension is what's generating
muscle growth because they're going to be like, oh, well, you know, CNFT just reduces recruitment a
little bit.
That's no big deal.
He's still got high muscle tension and you see how that works.
They, they don't understand that you're now getting selective loss of stimulus for specific muscle
fibers.
And that means they're now going to basically have no grip.
So imagine you're in a situation where and a lot of people are in this situation unknowingly.
Imagine you're in a situation where you've done, you're doing a training program that's got a little
bit too much volume and you've got a little bit of accumulated background muscle damage and
therefore an inflammatory response and therefore some superspinal CNFT.
And that's just sitting there in the background.
OK.
Now if that's happening, you basically just reduce, you've just removed access to the top end of the
motor unit pool.
Every time you now go in the gym, there's no way you can activate those fibers.
Now you've just got full on atrophy happening of those fibers, that top end of the motor unit pool.
People think that it's all just about a matter of degree.
I'm like, oh, I'm just getting a little bit less stimulus.
So the whole muscle is not going to get quite the same challenge.
And they use words that are not physiological because they're trying to be vague about what's,
because they don't know like, well, no, it's not what's happening.
What's happening is you actually fundamentally lost access to being able to train those fibers now.
I mean, they might as well now be like immobilised as just or in space or something.
There's, there's no stimulus being like they're just going to shrink back to baseline levels.
So straight away you've got to be aware that CNS fatigue is, is going to have these very, very kind
of pronounced effects.
If you let it kind of stop you from ever training those, probably because you're in an estate of
accumulated fatigue, peripheral fatigue, then you've kind of again, got a whole bunch of interesting
stuff going on.
You've got calcium iolate stuff which reduces tension.
So we want to try and avoid that or again, that kind of then starts to change the way we think about
doing strength training programs, but don't want to end up with calcium iolate because it reduces
tension, which reduces the stimulus.
So we can now go, OK, well, what types of training are going to produce calcium ion accumulation?
Well, you know, eccentrics, stretch positions like loads and you can start to see how those things
will then have negative implications for you, not just from I tend to talk about that stuff from a
post workout particular point of view, but that actually is going to create problems within the
workout.
So you can kind of go, well, OK, so I don't want to do a stretch position exercise before I do a
contract position one then.
But everyone goes, Oh no, no, no, no, you need the you need the stretch.
That's where all the stimulus is going from.
Like aside from the fact that what you just said is nonsense, yeah, actually isn't a good idea
because the contract position you can actually recover from because it doesn't have that calcium.
You can do that straight position exercise afterwards if that's really what you want to do.
So I think, you know, it starts to then give you a framework for understanding how fatigue
mechanisms are working in the context of your strength train worker.
You can now program much, much more effectively because you think about the fibre and what it's
exposed to people thinking in.
This is why I think Hypertroid researchers have never got their heads around how fatigue works in
the context of hypertroid, because they can't think in terms of fibers.
They keep thinking about, oh, it's the muscle, it's the muscle, it's muscle.
The muscle is experiencing these fatigue mechanisms.
They're like, well, how does that affect them?
Well, I don't know because if I go and look at the literature, they're all talking about single
fibers and I don't want to do that.
I want to think about the whole muscle.
So I can't really make the fatigue literature fit with what I'm talking about.
Well, I can because I think about hypertrophy as a single fiber phenomenon.
So now I can use the fatigue literature.
And This is why I use the fatigue literature and very other very, it's not the only reason.
It's because it actually took me like two or three years to work through it all.
And that's just a really tedious process that I wouldn't wish on my worst enemy.
But you know, it is a really kind of easy thing to then do.
If you've got a hypertrophy specific, sorry, a muscle hypertrophy model, you can use the for the
literature very, very easily.
Once you've been through that horrible process of reading it, which I've simplified by giving people
the FAQ, which nobody wants to read, Then ultimately you can kind of now apply that list to very,
very easy because you've got this very kind of clear framework about how it is impacting on either
recruitment as in number of files they're activated or kind of potential on single fiber level.
So I.
Think someone should create an app?
You know those like that behaves in apps like this, you know, it'll be like read the Bible in a year
app and it gives you like passages.
Each.
Year someone who's more app savvy created, put online and tag us.
Please don't.
But anyway, so yeah, basically I think there's the big rocks.
It's the only kind of OK.
Don't get hung up on the terminology of no mechanical matching if you think you've got a better
motor control model that determines which muscle fibers are activated and which situations use that.
But it doesn't matter.
The point is muscle fibre.
How?
There's something which is determined which fibres are being used.
Yeah, exactly.
Whatever model you want to use, I think the mechanical matching has the best data behind it.
Whatever motor control model you want to use, it means that different fibres are being activated in
different situations and therefore you are going to have different regional muscle growth depending
on which exercise you do.
That means you're going to need some different exercises.
Frequency is also going to get affected because of that.
So you are now going to need to train those exercises multiple times per week.
And then obviously, as I say, fatigue is going to guide you towards more sensible Rep set kind of
exercise type selection variables because you're now going to understand how the team mechanisms are
negatively affecting the hypertrophy stimulus that you're getting and a very granular way.
So I think those are probably the big rocks.
Yeah, yeah.
And what's cool is we've come at it from the physiological perspective, right?
And then retrospectively we can look back and be like, oh, cool, this is how the silvery guys made
that work.
This is what it.
This is how every single human being on the planet train before anabolic steroids were introduced.
Yeah, exactly.
Which is a really good sense check.
And they did it the other way.
They've intruded it and they've, you know, just through trial and error found out what worked and
they maybe tried to put some language to it and tried to put some Physiology to it, But obviously
they didn't have that level of understanding and knowledge that we have now.
And you know, the fact that we've been out to meet at the same location be like, well, actually what
they're doing, it did make sense.
It does make sense.
And, and you know, the, the model, even if you, if you started by ignoring all this silver stuff and
you just went through the Physiology and you went through the model and you tried to write out a
program that made sense, it's going to end up looking almost identical to what these guys are doing.
More or less, I mean, I think I think that there's some sort of science based lifters that are doing
interesting stuff.
I've been on, I've been on a kind of bit of a rant today.
So I might as well just carry on and rant a little bit more.
And some of this there's going to be a little bit of a positive rant here and a bit of a negative
run.
So one of the very, very few things that gives me a little bit of hope for the human race is when I
see people who have taken the model that I've built and then created some really cool practical
applications off the back of that.
Now I've talked the best about how you've done that with your training programs.
And I think, you know, they're probably the best training programs out there at the moment, you
know, for the for the general population who who want to, well, I mean, right the way up, I mean, I
would say right, the way up to competitive bodybuilding, really.
But you know, for everybody from the general population who want to kind of add kind of muscle mass
at the recreational level, right the way through to competitive bodybuilding.
I think, you know, that's what's cool about the group that you're running.
And I'm kind of asking you to talk about that in a moment.
But what I kind of, I also see though, is that there are science based lifters who are doing, you
know, really experimental stuff.
So there's people out there who are looking for maximum stability.
They're looking for the ability to train muscles in all kinds of different kind of ranges of motion
and, and directions and trying to look for ways to create a, you know, an incredibly comprehensive
program.
And I think those guys are doing some really, really creative stuff.
And that that I think is really, really brilliant.
And I, I guess what this little kind of mini observation is about is to say I wish that more people
would use my modelling that way.
So what I mean by that is that I wish more people would use the model and just kind of start from it
and build on it practically.
What happens, what 99.9% of people do, and I've, I've said this before and I hope people don't think
that I'm bitter about this because I'm not.
It's just, this is just how human beings are.
They, they steal most of it and then they argue vociferously about why I'm wrong about 1234 percent
of it that they don't like.
And that achieves nothing.
It achieves absolutely nothing because their opinions won't be there in a few years time, 5/10/20
years time, they won't be there.
The only thing that'll be there is the stimulating its model.
That's that's just how it is because the model is the only thing that is actually, you know, new and
interesting.
All the observations that people are making when they go, oh, no, no, no, I don't agree with Chris
about this and I don't agree with Chris about that.
Doesn't matter.
Your opinion will be gone in a few years time.
Nobody will care, you know, but what people will care about is, you know, do we actually have any
practical programming that's built on the back of that?
You know, that's why I think, you know, your programmes are awesome because they do actually
probably produce the most valid but simultaneously practical training programme that can be done in
a variety of different contexts, even, you know, in a garage style generally.
That's really important.
But similarly, you know, like other people who are out there who've come to the absolute extreme of
doing like 60 exercises in a workout and they're all kind of, you know, incredibly creative
exercises and they're strapped into all kinds of weird positions in I think that's amazing.
I think that's really, really cool because they're actually starting from a physiological model and
they've gone to the absolute extreme and gone, what would this look like if I maximized absolutely
everything?
I'm like, this is amazing that you actually, you've actually taken my model and done something
creative with it.
And that's just fantastic.
You know, whereas people who are kind of going, oh, well, no, I'm, I'm just going to kind of, you
know, steal all the Christmas stuff and then argue about 5% of it.
I'm like, you know, how do you even look at yourself in the mirror?
I mean, like, what are you doing with your life?
But anyway, that's just kind of a little bit ranty.
I accept and I apologise to any bemused.
Well, I actually think, I do think that that's where the, the most value that people can can have or
produce or give occurs anyway.
Because, you know, I, I sort of, again, I don't want to add to the grant too much, but I do look at
the industry a lot.
And I think that there's often there's not a lot of creativity and not a lot of, of, yeah, I guess
creation and the sort of, you know, life giving that's occurring.
And there's, there's a lot of diminishing and trying to tear people down.
And that stuff doesn't tend to actually move anything forward.
And I think what can move forwards is, and you know, I've seen this happen a lot and, you know,
sometimes through applications I've made where I take your model and, you know, might try to use
that in certain ways and in programming contexts.
And then that stuff actually gets adopted.
And then people realise, oh, that's a, a creative way of using the model or that's a creative, you
know, way of programming that actually makes sense physiologically.
And then some of those bits, you know, some of them might be small, but they become widely adopted,
you know, and I see people now in the, you know, science based lifting kind of world and it's kind
of just accepted or this is the way we program this.
So this is, you know, something that we just all do it this way.
It's just become accepted as this is the best way of programming for this thing or you know, this
muscle or whatever.
I look at some of that stuff, I'm like, well, five years ago that wasn't accepted.
You know, five years ago, even even when we're having conversations around your model, that wasn't
the way that we were generally programming these things.
And now people just accept or this is the best way of programming XYZ.
And so I actually think that's where there's a lot of utilities is go look at the model, think about
it laterally, think about it creatively, experiment with some different things in the gym.
And that's the stuff you can catch on.
You know, that's the stuff that can actually influence people.
Hey, this is a better way of programming.
This is a better way of doing this rather than, you know, like you're saying, Hey, let's just shit
kick this one particular, you know, part of the model or this one particular argument or no,
neuromechanical matching is not the thing that determines, you know, which muscle fibre is going to
be active.
Like, OK, we can, we can have some of those academic conversations, that's fine.
But the average person, coach or influence or educator who's trying to kind of help people in the
industry, that's not the stuff that's going to help them.
By no means is that going to do it.
Yeah.
And I mean, as I said earlier, new mechanical matching isn't even part of the stimulating model.
It's just, you know, the prevailing motor control model that we've got.
So it doesn't really matter the the point is that whatever motor control model you use, you're still
going to be ending up using the stimulator model to explain how it works in the context of a
strength training program.
I just think that your mechanical matching makes more sense than anything else.
So, yeah, but you know, let's kind of come back to the to the group because we don't talk about this
enough.
Yeah.
So obviously we've we've launched our first phase of the hypertrophy past and present chain heroic
group.
So that is a group where you can sign up, you can be part of a community, part of other people are
following the same program.
It's going to be silver.
Well, it is a silverware based program.
This first phase is doing a Ridge Park variation program, not his sort of classic 5 by 5, but more
of his sort of defining type programming.
And it's an opportunity for you to get a good home gym based program, one that you can make some
alterations based of your own equipment.
You've got access to me in there.
You can ask me questions, you can send me form check videos.
You know, I'm, I'm there to help guide kind of whatever is going to help you be successful in that.
And then every probably 8 weeks or so, we're going to shift to a, a slightly different program.
Obviously, we're going to keep the, the bones the same.
So a lot of the excise selection, it's going to stay very similar.
You know, based on what we've talked about today, we're going to be programming in a way that makes
sense physiologically where we know, hey, hypertrophy is happening in muscle fiber level.
We're not going to just throw random exercises at you, but we're going to shift it.
So he's going to be, I guess inspired by a different silver era lift out a different silver era
program.
And you know that it didn't really come up today in the conversation, but I was going to mention
when he said programming is kind of boring, like the, the, the best programming for natural lifters
ends up looking boring.
I think in some ways it does.
And in some ways it's actually opportunity for there to be a lot of creativity.
And I think Alan Stephen actually did that well because he kept these exercises the same.
But you look at some of his other programs and he's doing clusters, you know, he's doing, you know,
10/15/20 sets of, of single repetitions or doubled repetitions.
And there can be some cool stuff like that where, hey, if we keep exercises the same, we can
actually use some really creative other methods that does add variety, does add variation, but it
actually keeps all the underlying principles the same.
Yeah, absolutely.
I mean, I think that was a great choice that Alan Steven planned today.
It was a really inspired pick.
I'm pleased that you you dug that one out.
So that was one of our longest episodes.
I think hopefully some of you are still here at the end.
And I mean, I guess we kind of wanted to cover this because there's so much that actually rests on
this particular topic.
You know, if you, you mentioned, you know, you can either look at it as hypertrophies happening at a
muscle fiber level or it's a whole muscle level.
And depending on where you start with that one question, it will take you down completely different
paths.
And unless we actually acknowledge what it is we're talking about there and how much it influences
everything else, we just end up talking past each other.
The acknowledgement is the point.
The acknowledgement is the point.
I think what I'm seeing is that people are just skating past it.
You know, they're saying, oh, you know, hypertrophy is just, you know, motive agreement to
mechanical tension and they're skating past it or they're hand waving past it.
And like, no, no, no, no.
You need to really tell me exactly what you mean by that statement because it matters a lot whether
you're saying that you think it's whole muscle force or single fibre force.
If you're saying it's single fibre force, then we need to go down the route of actually
understanding where are you justifying that or how are you justifying that and which is what I've
done today.
And secondly, then what does it mean?
Which is what we've done when we've gone through the practical implications.
And I genuinely think that if people would just kind of pause and think about this issue a little
bit more, they'd probably end up in the same place that I am, which is a stimulating match model.
Well, thank you guys.
You made it this far.
I know this was a relatively dense episode, and maybe, maybe next week we'll do a slightly easier,
more accessible episode.
Who knows, maybe it'll be even more dense, I don't know.
But thank you if you made it this far, and I hope you'll join us again next week for a new topic.