Episode: 051 The silver era perfected drop sets 75 years ago
URL: https://open.spotify.com/episode/4ztlz6H6Cu8nQtRLQLtZxU
Published: 2026-05-11
================================================================================

Welcome back, everyone.
Thank you for joining us for another episode.
Just before we hit record, you were saying, man, those birds in your backyard are so noisy and
they've just left.
So perfect timing.
Hopefully they stay gone.
I have a whole flock of incredibly noisy birds in my backyard.
Chris, how are you doing today?
I'm doing alright.
Thank you, Jake.
Yeah, not inundated with noisy birds in your backyard.
Well, it's the middle of the night here, so most of the birds are asleep.
I have bat in my backyard in the middle of the night.
OK today I came across this workout a few weeks ago no about about a week ago and I almost fell off
my chair.
I think it was like 1:00 in the morning.
And this is what people do on this Saturday night till 1:00 in the morning.
I assume this is normal behaviour.
I was just scrolling through trying to find as many old bodybuilding articles, letters, magazines as
I could and I managed.
I stumbled across what I I don't want to like make this claim confidently, but I feel like this may
be one of the earliest references drop sets.
I mean, they're not called drop sets, but I feel like in in practicali, that's what it is.
And I haven't seen an earlier version of drop sets.
And incidentally, I had actually just come from the gym earlier that day.
And this is a little bit controversial to say, but I had done drop sets in my own workout and I'd
done them exactly the way they're outlined in this article.
And so I had this like sort of revelation or like a hot moment at 1:00 in the morning, like, Oh my
God, these guys are doing this almost what, 7576 years ago?
And I think it's pretty cool.
Now, I'm well aware of where this conversation is going to go in about 15 minutes time when we talk
about drop sets and you're going to say I'm an idiot for doing them.
But before we get to that point, I'm going to travel in this program.
So this comes from 1949.
OK?
So well and truly before anabolics, like there's no doubt about that.
And it comes, well, almost no doubt about that.
And anyway, this comes from a bodybuilder who I actually had not heard of.
So Henry J Atkin.
I don't know if if you've heard of him before Chris, but apparently he actually was instrumental in
redesigning the barbell that was used in 1948 weightlifting champions ships.
I don't know anything about that.
But when I was looking into who this guy was, that seems to be his, his sort of main kind of fame.
He's an author and, and you know, involved in a lot of magazines.
I think he actually launched his own magazine in, in the late 40s, early 50s, but not someone, not a
name that you'll see appear very regularly in some of the silver era history and ours.
And this came from a letter of his, I don't know if you go to for an article, a magazine article or
what.
And this new sort of training routine method that he had started to do and he was amazed with the
results that they were starting to get done earlier.
OK, He'd only been doing it for I think a couple of weeks.
So obviously this is, you know, where he's, he's just talking about his anecdote over a few weeks
time with his clients.
But he was calling this a multiple poundage system.
Not quite as catchy as job sets, but there you go, multiple poundage system.
And I don't know how long this was used for.
Again, I haven't seen references to this sort of after this date.
This is the first one I saw, but let me tell you guys how he did this work out.
So as was obviously quite common, he was doing full body and he was taking his clients or his
workout partners or whatever through full body routines and they were done.
I believe he actually mentioned every other day.
But obviously what would have been norm for most people would have been three times a week and it
was full body.
And he just did a what I guess we would kind of call a consolidated style in terms of excise
selection.
And the exercises he used were a flat barbell bench, which they called, what do they call it, press
in the back at that point in time, and then a standing barbell curl, a variation of a lat pull down
with some kind of pulley machine.
They were using a pullover, using a barbell or dumbbell, I think barbell and then a squat, which
they would call a deep knee bend.
So that were the five exercises used in your routine.
That's it.
And he talks about you can select different exercises, but ideally doing, I think he says about 5.
I think he says 5 exercises are probably the sweet spot here.
Now what he did with these exercises is he would select A7 repetition Max load and then perform 5
repetitions in the first set.
So taking it 2 reps in reserve and then immediately reduce the load by 20% and then go again and do
a little drop.
And this time I think he would go to failure.
I mean they didn't use language of fairly andrep in reserve.
So you have to sort of, you know, induct some of this information from you know what else they're
sort of communicating.
But it sounds as if he would take that next set of failure, then he would do another reduction of
20% and do one more set of failure.
And he says that if you do it this way, you will get probably about 12 to 15 repetitions.
So it looks like it's something like a initial set of five, very short dress period, which it's
important to note when we're talking about these drop sets that there's usually going to be some
form of dress period.
And we're going to talk about that a little bit more later on.
But obviously that might just be 10 seconds, but there's something that's happening there.
So an initial set of five, probably about 10 seconds and then another set of probably about four,
another 10 seconds or so, and then another set of four.
And that would be it for that exercise.
You wouldn't repeat that again.
And then you would move on to your next exercise in 49.
I'm, I was amazed when I saw this.
What do you?
And honestly, I mean, like I said, I had just come from the gym using this method myself.
But before I sort of rave about it, what do you think, Chris?
There's yeah.
There's so much going on here that's worth talking about.
I mean, straight away the the Rep ranges are really interesting.
So, you know, I often talk about how I think, you know, sort of five to seven reps in a set is a
great sweet spot or 6:00 to 8:00 depending on, you know, how you want to to organise it.
So to see that straight away is is very cool.
And then obviously, you know, kind of reproducing that in each of the drops as well.
So kind of aiming for, you know, a little bit more than or around about the number of stimulating
reps that we would expect to be in a set.
It's it's really interesting also to see that kind of couple of reps in reserve.
I mean, I often talk about two reps in reserve being this kind of really magical kind of sweet spot
for avoiding calcium I related fatigue and that is going to be an issue with drop sets in general.
So to see that here, it's, it's very cool because that is going to take some of the problem away
from, you know, the negative side of what drop sets.
Do you kind of reduce that a little bit.
It's really interesting to see the fact that it's a kind of a 20% ish kind of reduction in load
because when you look at the literature that we've got today, that is pretty much the number that
they use today.
So it kind of fits with what where we've ended up on that in terms of protocols.
So I think it, I think it, there's, there's some really interesting stuff going on here in terms of,
I mean, again, I don't want to go into sort of analysing it too much at this point because obviously
we're going to do that when we talk about the literature as well.
But I like the reps and reserve.
I like the heavy loading.
I like the kind of Rep range they end up with for the, the individual components of the drop set
complex.
I think if if you're trying to construct a drop set that kind of routine that is as good as it
possibly can be, this is probably it.
I mean, I have reservations about whether it will actually do anything interesting, but I mean, I
think it is probably about as good as it's going to be.
I'm also, you know, before we move on, I'm or come back to, you know, what you're thinking about at
the moment.
But I'm also fascinated by the the exercise selection because I often complain about the lack of lap
pull downs in silver area routines.
And you've managed to find one right at the very beginning of the silver era.
You know, I think that's or not the very beginning, but certainly towards the beginning.
You know, I think that's that's pretty, pretty cool to see that.
But yeah, I mean, no hamstrings work.
But, you know, there we go.
Come on, everything.
It is interesting to let pull down.
I do wonder eases potentially due to the excess due to the drop set method, because if you were to
do a bent over row, obviously adjusting load on a bending on a barbell that's on the floor.
Yeah, exactly.
So I wonder if that's why, because obviously most programs at this point of time that we're using a
bent over row.
Now interestingly with the pullover, from memory, he actually talks about using the pullover for
triceps.
I'm fairly sure that's what he says.
So that's intriguing that he's seeing.
I mean, obviously we've got a Barbara curl in there for elbow flexes.
So he's intending to have a bench for, I mean, I guess he's probably assuming that that's going to
be enough for the delta as well.
So chess and delta covered barbell curl for elbow flexes.
He's got the lat pull down, obviously got the squat.
So obviously we don't have wreck femme and hamstrings and calves, but apart from that, he's thinking
then the pullover for triceps.
So you know, it's a, it's sort of what we've talked about when we talk about this kind of like, you
know, minimalist consolidated stuff where it's like 1 exercise firm muscle group.
You know, he's, I don't know why they're they're thinking pullover over, you know, a skull crusher
or something like that, which was being done at that time.
Bit an interesting sort of outline nonetheless.
Yeah, I mean, I, I don't want to kind of kick the exercise selection around too much.
I'd just kind of impressed that we've got the the lap pull down room.
We've kind of done exercise selection, you know, kind of analysis to death a whole bunch of times.
And, you know, I think it's obvious what's missing here, you know, to most people.
But yeah, it's, it's really, I mean, that that, that that drop set protocol is, is really, really
fascinating because again, like we've said 100 times before, you know, you can find, you can find
better protocols in the silver era literature than you can find anywhere in modern bodybuilding, you
know, kind of sort of information if you like.
I mean, they're, they're just so much better.
You know, it's just, it's really, really cool to see this here, as I say, probably about the best
way that you could construct a drop set protocol if you really wanted to do 1.
I mean, that's that's it right there.
Yeah, yeah.
And that's a theme across the board.
You know, when we've talked about Alan Steven in the past and we looked at his kind of, you know,
early variation of kind of like a cluster rest pause and it was done in very similar manner, 5 Rep
Max load.
And you know, getting sort of I think he was going for 25 repetitions, which would be on a sort of
top end of what we might say would be more likely to be recoverable there with that load.
It's a theme across the board is that these guys seem to find largely what's seen to be the most
efficient and most physiological kind of plausible or or logical way of doing some of these methods.
And some of these methods have progressed using that term loosely over the years into what appear to
be the less efficient or or less productive ways of using those methods.
And so I, I always find it very interesting to try to find if there is a method that, you know,
people are aware of something like drop, set, stress, pause classes, etcetera, how was that first
used?
And if I can find where it was first used before anabolics, more often than not, I'm not
disappointed.
More than not, I find it's being used in a very intelligent manner.
And I think this is a good example of that.
Oh, perfect.
And.
Throughout this conversation, you are going to tell us about the drop set literature and I think
it's going to become obvious that you feel a particular way about drop sets and maybe slightly
different to how I feel about drop sets marginally.
And so that we'll see how this conversation goes and we'll see where we end up.
But do you want to introduce us to where we're going next?
Yeah.
So really, in all honesty, I've never been that interested in in drop sets and I've never really
gone through and sort of analysed it in in the level of detail that I've analysed other stuff.
I mean, honestly, it never really made a lot of sense to me to spend the time because my starting
point was, well, we're just talking about short rest periods here.
I mean that that's really all we're talking about.
So, you know, you look at the rest period literature and you very quickly can see that from a long
term studies point of view, it doesn't make sense to do short rest periods for muscle growth.
And for from, from a physiological point of view, it doesn't make sense to do short rest periods
because you can see straight away that you've got fatigue mechanisms that are going to get in the
way of you maximizing the MOTI recruitment level.
And therefore optimizing not just your hypertrophy stimulus in like terms of how much, not really
the right words, but not you're not going to maximize the amount of muscle growth that you get from
that workout.
But also you're not going to be maximizing your long term potential.
Because every time you you reduce your motive equipment levels, you're reducing your kind of maximum
capacity that you're capable of reaching long term because that fibre, those fibres just aren't
going to get drained.
So, so, so I've never really kind of thought about it as an interesting project.
You shared, you know, with people on Instagram that you're interested in talking about drop search.
And I shared that and people were like, yeah, yeah, let's do it as a podcast episode.
So here we are.
We're doing it as a podcast episode.
I went to the most recent systematic review, which let me just grab the title for people.
So if you want to follow along, it's called Acute and Chronic Effects of Drop Set Training, a Metro
Analysis and systematic review.
So if you want to go and grab that paper, it's 2026 by Havers, it's Open Access, I think, so
everyone should be able to read that if they want to.
And basically there's some really nice tables in there that set out all the various elements of the
studies.
You can kind of go through that and see what they've said.
Now, as I started to go through the papers, something jumped out at me that I think is often not
emphasized.
So I'm going to define every single point at which failure is reached as a set.
So when we're talking about drop sets, often the terminology gets a little bit blurry.
So people can say, well, you know, I'm saying it's a drop set.
Well, which does that?
What thing does that refer to?
Does it refer to the entirety of all the little mini sets within that complex or does it refer to,
you know, kind of each one of them and the terminology get difficult.
I'm going to kind of refer to every point at which failure is reached as a set.
So if you're doing a drop set complex and you do a set to failure, followed by three further kind of
mini sets in which you're reaching failure at the end of each of those mini sets, then that is a
total of four sets to failure.
Now, what you'll find is that the literature is very vague about what a set is and whether the drop
set counts as like a kind of single set or multiple sets or what.
But as far as I'm concerned, if you're reaching failure, then that's a set.
And so if you kind of add another bunch of, you know, kind of failure points after that, then each
of those is then a set.
And the really interesting thing about that is when you do that, you realise that the drop set
literature generally compares in the drop set Group A lot more sets to failure than in the
traditional straight sets group.
So if I just run through these very quickly, so in the in the metro analysis that was done that I'm
referring to, there are papers by Fink, Ozarki, Anglieri and as Varevich, Velocity, Alves and Hens.
No, sorry, the Hinsons not included.
I found that it came afterwards so.
I think he said there's one additional Fisher.
Fisher, Fisher paper was done, but that was only I'm only going to refer to direct hypertrophy
measurements.
So the lean, the lean mass measurements I'm going to ignore.
So I'm going to exclude the Fisher, but I don't, I don't know if that makes any difference.
So if I start with think, basically they want to equate volume load.
So they ended up with having four sets total in the drop set group.
So basically that's a straight set of a single set to start with, followed by three additional kind
of drop sets that follow it.
Again, terminology is horrible here, but as I say, I'm referring to every single set point.
Failure is going to be a set, and then the traditional set group was just three sets.
So they're doing one extra failure moment in the drop set group compared to the traditional group.
Now, again, as I'm saying, they are trying to equate volume load.
I am very much opposed to the idea of equating volume loads in research studies.
I think it's fundamentally wrong.
I think that every time people do it, they are misleading.
The kind of misleading is the wrong word.
They are starting from a completely wrong point of reference because the literature makes it
incredibly clear that the Rep range does not matter if you do the same number of sets to failure.
So if I do three sets of eight, three sets of 10, three sets of 12 does not matter.
If you start equating volume load, you are immediately going in the opposite direction from that
finding.
You are trying to pretend that there is something about volume load that matters and there isn't
anything about volume load that matters.
So I'm very much opposed to this.
I think it's fundamental, physiologically inaccurate and I think it's it makes research findings
become misleading when you try and equate volume loads.
So in any way they they equated volume load in this paper and so they ended up with four sets to
failure in the drop set group for muscular failure moments in the drop set group and three muscular
failure moments in the traditional group.
And they basically ended up with more or less the same muscle group.
Now numerically it wasn't a drop set group was was higher, but statistically it was basically the
same.
So if you want to go on statistics, then essentially what you're saying there is that even though
the drop set group had more.
Failure points, more sets to failure as I would call it.
They ended up with still the same muscle growth.
Now honestly with it being four and three, I wouldn't read anything into that.
I just genuinely would think that's pretty, pretty meaningless.
Ozarky, same kind of idea.
They had five sets in the drop set group and three sets in the traditional group.
No differences between the hypertrophy that results.
So again, you would say, OK, so you're getting more that kind of sets to failure in drop sets, but
it's not giving you any benefit.
Anglia, I couldn't really think about what was going on, but you know, maybe other people can have a
look at that and see what they get to.
And there's, I've got six sets in the drop set group and I've got four sets in the kind of
traditional group that was drops where they're only doing 2 kind of sets per kind of drop set
complex.
And they did three sets, I think of each complex.
So six sets in total.
And the traditional group did 4.
Again, trying to equate volume load, which I fundamentally do disagree with.
Very happy to argue with people about that one.
I get really fired up about that.
So, and then Varevich, but this is the one where the, the set volumes just go absolutely mental.
So we were laughing about this before the podcast, but basically they're training like two or three
times a week.
Definitely 2 * a week.
Maybe they no, I think it, I think it is only two times a week.
I'm, I'm not sure about that actually.
Definitely 2 * a week, maybe 3.
Not sure.
But yeah, they're doing in the drop set group.
They're doing, they start out doing 9 sets.
So that's, I believe three sets of three drops.
I think I.
Believe so.
And that as in three sets within the drop set complex and then they're going up to five sets.
So a total of 15 sets in the drop set group and obviously 3-4 or five sets in the traditional group.
So absolutely crazy, crazy volumes basically in the drop set group doing 15 sets three times a week,
two or three times a week.
So triple the failure points than the.
Traditional sets?
Yeah, exactly any.
Findings.
So that's the only only one where there was a superior statistical benefit and the volume is
literally triple.
Interesting, but interesting.
I do want to make a point here on this because if you look at the acute differences in muscle
swelling between drop sets and normal strength training, the drop sets blow the traditional group
out in the water in terms of post workout muscle swelling.
So I don't think you can rush straight in and go, you know, Oh well, it's clearly a great
hypertrophy.
I mean, it might be, but I think doing 15 sets three times a week, you've had a very, very strong
argument for it being muscle swelling velocity Alves.
Honestly, I think you can just ignore this paper entirely because they used percentages of Walmart
Max and they didn't train to failure.
So I I think that paper just doesn't make any sense to to include it.
And then the Hinson is not included in the statistical analysis of the metro analysis using to
anchor these papers.
It's a it's a new paper.
It's really, really interesting.
It has a very, very unique protocol in terms of the drop set.
Not it's very much like you're routine that you shared with us at the beginning, actually in the
sense that it, it uses a velocity loss to cause to to trigger a stopping of each of the components
of the drop set complex.
So rather than training all the way to failure for each part of the drop set complex, they kind of
train to like maybe somewhere between nought and two reps in reserve.
And then the velocity loss triggers a drop in the kind of load.
So they end up with a bow.
I think I was, we were working this out before.
It's not hugely clear, but I think they're working with around about 8 total sets in the drop set
group of two, two sets, 2 drop set complexes of four total sets within each drop set complex.
And then the trad group is just doing 4 sets total, so double.
And they actually found that the trad group was superior in terms of hypertrophy in the drop set
group.
So that's that's my kind of working through of these method papers, method sections of these papers.
I do want to be clear that when I was working through these resist the resistance training
protocols, the way that they are explained and laid out is really, really not easy to follow.
So you have to be concentrating and, and making sure that you're happy with what you can, with what
you're reading that actually makes sense.
And sometimes there's like there'll be a table that relates to the kind of protocol and the tables
at one end of the paper, the methods, the other end of the paper, you're flicking barriers and
forwards between the table and, and the description trying to go, what are they trying to say here?
What is actually going on?
You know, and it's very, very confusing and frustrating, but, and, and, and if you don't like really
care about drop sets, like I don't at all, then you kind of lose motivation to really kind of wade
through all this stuff.
But in short, what I'm what I'm getting at here is that as far as I can tell, if you count every
single kind of failure moment as a set to failure, which is what it is, then the drop set literature
has basically compared drop sets which have way more sets to failure than the traditional group, and
yet they've almost never found any benefit of the drop set group.
The only time there is a benefit of the drop set group is when they are doing such unholy amounts of
volume that it's almost certainly not a swelling problem, you know, So what I'm what I'm seeing in
the drop set literature is that the doing the additional sets to failure after reaching failure
actually doesn't seem to do anything at all, so you might as well just not do it.
That's kind of where I got to.
I know when we were looking at it originally, there was kind of like we were thinking, well maybe if
you kind of used heavier loading left reperum reserve here or there, maybe you could get a drop set
protocol to give you something extra.
What I'm seeing here by looking at these studies suggests that they actually don't do anything at
all.
And that would suggest to me that what's happening physiologically is that there is so much there
are so there there's such a high level of fatigue mechanisms that are impairing the hypertrophy
stimulus at muscular failure that if you do like a another set to failure immediately upon reaching
failure, it really is very, very much kind of reduced in, in, in value.
So I think that it would be worth, you know, kind of leaving a short rest period of some description
to try and get rid of some of that.
You know, and as we've talked about before, you know superspinal and spinal CST, you can get rid of
a lot of that by leaving 30 seconds.
There's, I think so many different ways we could talk about this.
There's so many interesting points we could highlight.
One of them is what you've just said there.
So what I think is interesting when you look at all those studies is that most of them found no
significant difference between the two groups, right?
And one of the ones that did is the newest one that you mentioned there where they did that via a
different method and they didn't have any rest period at all between those drops because they had
this special tonal device and it would adjust the load as participant kept performing their
repetitions.
And so it's interesting to me that, you know, obviously we can't fully equate that study with the
other studies just in terms of how many repetitions and value points etcetera.
But you know, broadly speaking, we probably can in a sense.
And when we've got this study where there's no rest period at all, it's the only one where they
noted significantly better hypertrophy in the traditional group.
And so to me, that's pretty to the spinal.
It does, it does it point, it points to CNS fatigues dissipating very quickly, not fully, but
definitely tanking really quickly as soon as you finish the set and being really problematic at
that.
Yeah, at that, at that, that failure moment.
So definitely moving us towards saying, you know, if you can take some kind of rest period, it's
going to yield a better result which really starts to kind of make you go, well, would I not be
better off doing rest pause then instead of drop sets?
Yeah.
So I think that's the next interesting point to highlight is if we assume that there's nothing
magical happening in this kind of drop, OK, we assume that there's nothing to this, you know,
metabolite metabolic stress or whatever, you know, people's explanations may have been.
And you know, we're looking at it as basically this is a study on rest periods.
You know, drop set is basically just very short rest periods essentially.
Yeah.
And that's not too dissimilar to clusters.
Classes are also just short rest periods, maybe marginally longer, but you know not massively so.
And yet classes we're not getting like we've obviously talked about classes in the past and we're
not suggesting or we haven't suggested the clusters are going to produce superior hypertrophy to
traditional sets if you were to do the same amount of repetitions and sets etcetera.
But we're saying that it can be used as an efficiency moderator and I guess that's the way I would
be looking at kind of a a well constructed drop set protocol.
Is it seems illogical to me for anyone to argue that it's a potentially superior hypertrophy
stimulus.
You know, we again, this is just rest periods and ultimately for one to argue that they would have
to be arguing that very short rest periods are better for hypertrophy than longer rest periods.
Yeah.
I mean, what would be the mechanism?
I mean, it's just like there's nothing you can kind of point at that would make any sense.
I mean, when we talked about clusters, we, I think we did a pretty comprehensive analysis of, of, of
clusters a while back.
And you know, one of the points that we emphasize is that you kind of have to work with heavy loads
to make it work because you need to be making sure that every single Rep you do is automatically
qualifying as a stimulating Rep.
If you do a bunch of clusters and you're working with eight Rep maxes or 10 Rep maxes and half the
reps that you're doing, kind of not achieving anything, then basically you're just kind of wasting
your time and, and, and slowing down.
The point to which you get to the stimulating Rep zone, if you're hitting it from A5 Rep Max from
the beginning, it becomes really, really interesting straight away.
And everything you're doing is quality Rep.
And I think you can make the same case for drop search really, you know, if you, like we said, you
know, starting out with kind of sort of 5-6 Rep Max territory and then, you know, kind of doing that
first set and then leaving a little rest and then doing a couple more reps maybe with a slightly
light load.
Honestly though, the more I think about it, the more I think, well, just leave a little bit of a
longer rest, keep the weight the same, and just do rest pause because you'd probably find you'd be
in a better territory in that situation.
OK, so I want to play devil's advocate there.
So if we talk about classes, the way I would program classes to be a set of five, you might maybe,
you know, I guess you could use like a four to six trip Max, whatever.
But let's just say you do a five year Max and then you might perform double s with this.
So 2 repetitions.
And let's say you have 30 seconds rest period between each of those mini classes sets, right?
And so you're using the same load throughout and each mini cluster is going to yield let's say 2
repetitions.
Now how is that different to doing a 5 Rep Max load for your initial drop set?
And maybe you keep one Rep in reserve and then you take the same amount of time.
You take the 30 seconds you would for the cluster, but instead of using the same load and getting 2,
you reduce it and you get 4.
Is that essentially are we seeing kind of the same sort of stimulus that we would see with multiple
cluster sets?
Because each of those 4 repetitions, arguably they should more or less be simulated repetitions in
in that scenario, assuming that there wasn't a huge amount of super spinal CNS fatigue carried over
in that after that 32nd dress period from a set of four, which I would argue most of the time, maybe
if you're doing squats, that'll be different.
OK.
But most of the time, if you do a set of four and you've kept a Rep in reserve and you've given
yourself 30 seconds, I don't think there's going to be a whole stack of superspinal CNS fatigue.
Yeah.
I mean, that's that, you know, you, you kind of starting to go back to the routine that we, yeah,
exactly described.
But that's the whole point, isn't it?
I mean, it's like that's where you're going to end up.
You're going to end up back at the silver era kind of way of doing things because they figured it
out at the beginning.
Yeah.
I mean, like, if you're kind of doing sort of your first set with a 5:00-ish Rep Max, and then, you
know, you're taking some rest period and then you're ending up with the four reps or so.
I mean, like, do it as a rest pause and get a single or a double.
I mean, yeah.
I mean, either way, it's going to be more or less the same kind of territory.
Whereas with less pause, you'd have to do a couple of reps and then leave another kind of bit of a
rest period, then do another one or two reps and then leave a rest period.
And whereas with drops, as you get 4 reps out on that, that that that second element to the drop set
complex because you've dropped the load.
So you're able to do a little bit more kind of repetitions.
Yeah, I think you're more or less in the same kind of territory.
So, yeah, I mean, it's, it's totally doable.
So it what it becomes then is a practical matter of which is easier to do.
Is it easier to leave the weight in place and do it as a rest pause?
Or is it easier to just more convenient drop the weight slightly and do it as a drop?
Ultimately the only thing that's going to differ is if you do too many of those drops and you end up
with a relatively light load on the bar, then you are probably going to get pretty different output
in terms of post workout fatigue.
Whereas if you do rest, pause and you stick with the heavier load, you're not going to have that
problem.
Yeah, yeah.
So really a, a cluster kind of approach like that is going to allow you to get more total
stimulating repetitions in that single kind of bout and also to mitigate the post workout fatigue
from that total amount of of simulated repetitions.
But if you were to do so, let's say someone has to do classes and now to do 10 mini classes sets of
double s, you're going to be able to get more hypertrophy stimulus doing that than doing a single
drop set where you're doing multiple drops.
But if you were to do classes and you only did say 3 or 4 classes like of twos, then you'd be able
to get probably somewhat equivalent hypertrophy similar from doing the drops that we've just
explained be doing four or five repetitions, drop another 4, drop another four.
And then like you said, obviously, they need to look at what's going to be easy to set up.
And I guess where I'm landing is if I had an exercise that was very cardiovascular demanding.
So again, let's use a squat as an example.
To me, that squat makes much more sense to do as a cluster where that first set is taken 3 reps in
reserve.
If I've got an exercise that is not as cardiovascular demanding, maybe I'm doing a, a, a biceps curl
or something like that.
I think it makes more sense to use the drop in that sense, in the, in that context.
And I'm doing that, you know, four or five repetitions, drop, drop.
So in my sort of mind, the cluster and the drop set, the way we've explained them, they're kind of
fulfilling the same purpose.
And I'm just going to choose one depending on if it's more cardiovascular to many exercise or the
other.
If it's not.
And then it's going to be probably a little bit more time efficient than doing a cluster in in that
sort of exercise where I don't need it to be a classic because it's minimal superspinal CNS fatigue.
Well, that's exactly what I was just about to say.
Another way of putting what you've just said is to say if I'm not worried about superspinal CNS, I
can do drop sets.
I mean, that's literally what you're saying, isn't it?
Yeah, exactly.
Yeah, that was the one sentence summary of it.
Yeah.
I mean, so, so yeah, I mean, if if you've got a a single joint or you know, even a single joint
single limb exercise, more muscle mass and you're not worried about there being a lot of CNS fatigue
and you've got high voluntary activation capacity, then you can kind of get away with doing some
drop set stuff.
But I mean, some of these drop set studies did use preacher curls and they still got you kind of
more or less into the same place.
So I think it still makes sense to, you know, move away from the modern drop set idea of running
straight from one set to the next to try and cram the, you know, individual elements or the drop set
complex together.
I still, I still think it makes sense to try and give yourself sort of at least 15 seconds, if not a
little bit more, because that will actually translate to higher levels of recruitment in those
subsequent elements of the drop set complex.
And as I say, I mean literally just just go through the studies, you know, if, if you don't believe
me, just go through the studies and you'll see that basically it looks like, I mean, if you wanted
to be very, very kind of argumentative about it, you could literally just say, honestly, it looks
like everything after the first set, all the drop set bits are doing nothing.
You could make that case, I think.
So I think it does make a lot of sense to try and find ways to limit the most likely physiological
mechanisms causing you the problem there, which is the superspinal and spinal CNS fatigue.
Leave a little bit of a rest period use, have your loads Rep and reserve here or there and it'll
start to kind of have a little bit of a more positive effect.
And as you point out, with certain muscle groups, certain exercises, you can push it further and in
certain exercises you probably can't do it at all.
And squat is a great example of that.
I just wouldn't go near that from from a drop set point of view.
You mentioned it might make sense to give yourself that 15 seconds or so.
I've been having a bit of fun playing the heart rate monitor and what I'm noticing myself again, end
of one.
Other people might be different, but in that first 15 seconds for almost every exercise, again, not
a squat, but most other exercises, I'm noticing I have massive reduction in heart rate if I'm using
a low repetition set.
So I'm doing a set of five, set of four or five.
In that first 15 seconds, most of that elevation has dropped back down to baseline for me.
And so that's kind of how I've sort of come across or come to my conclusion that the drop says why I
tend to give about 15 to 30 seconds for those four to five Rep drops.
Because really in in my scenario at least, there seems to be very little superspinal scene as
fatigue that's carrying over in those studies you've talked about, apart from that one where they
use very, very high volumes 15.
Yeah, aerobic.
Yeah, yeah.
They were all using, I don't want to say high repetition, but they were all using moderate or higher
grabs.
None of them were using fives or fours, anything like that, like what we're referring to here.
And then so, you know, obviously that's going to, I guess, influence some of these results or the
efficacy of drop sets.
And then the second thing to note is they're all comparing pretty high volumes.
Yeah, like even the traditional sets, we're looking at three sets, four sets, five sets, I think in
some of them.
And I don't know if I was to program drop sets like I don't think I would be programming them in the
context of this very high volume substitute or, or doing multiple sets of drop sets.
You know, what I like about that silver area plan we looked at is they did one drop set.
They did, you know, one drop drop and that's exactly what I would be doing.
You know, I would, I just wouldn't.
That's.
Really how it should be compared.
I mean, when we were when we were kind of talking about this before we jumped on the podcast today,
you were asking me, well, you know what, what would you, how would you construct a study that would
be useful rather than some of these silly high volume studies?
And you know, I think we came to a really cool conclusion, which is that what you would want is you
would want a traditional set protocol where it was just single sets three times a week.
So you're doing one set Monday, one set Wednesday, Wednesday, Friday.
And then you would do a drop set group, which would have probably two additional mini sets after the
main sets.
You would do the same single set three times a week, but you would add on 2 drops.
So you do a total of three sets and that would get get you into the same kind of territory as we see
as the upper end of, you know, set volumes in recoverable territory.
So you'd be doing three sets three times a week and you compare that with your one set three times a
week.
Now you then suggested that you could then do a three sets trad group as well.
You could have three straight sets.
And So what you'd end up with is you'd have your single set three times a week.
You'd have your drop set with three total sets within that drop set complex.
And then you'd have three straight sets with proper rest periods.
And what you should end up with, if you had enough statistical kind of power, what you should end up
with is a gradual increase in hypertrophy from the single set through the drop set into the three
sets trad group.
And you'd be able to then peg your kind of sort of drop set whether it was halfway or closer to the
single set or close to the the three sets.
And I think you'd probably find that it would.
If it was done with minimal rest periods, I think it'd be actually quite close to the single set.
It wouldn't actually give you very much at all.
If you left like 15 to 30 seconds between each of the individual components, I think it would start
to push up kind of more either to halfway between the two or more like maybe 2/3, again, depending
on the exercise.
I mean, obviously doing squats news wouldn't work, but if you're doing like, you know, kind of
triceps extensions or biceps, because I would say probably between 1/2 and 2/3 of the way towards
the three second group.
So in that scenario, you can really start to make the case that people do make, which is that you're
doing drop sets because it saves time.
Yeah.
Well, yeah.
OK.
If you're doing Tri 6 extensions or biceps curls and you're doing it like as a single drop set
complex and you're replicating the idea of doing three sets per workout, yes, you are saving time.
And yeah, it does make sense.
And that's probably that kind of section of the practical kind of programming element that you could
say, yeah.
In that context, drop sets are starting to make a little bit of sense for these people.
In this scenario, would I do it in competitive bodybuilding?
No, because I think you're, you're losing that top end like MOT unit crewmen that you can't really
do without.
Would you do it for like intermediates and kind of absolutely, yeah, it makes a lot of sense.
And especially because it's fun and it's different and it's saving a lot of time and you, you
crunched on time in those scenarios.
So yeah, absolutely.
So I think there's probably a little bit of of specificity regarding the population as well.
You mentioned you wouldn't use it for a bodybuilder because you're losing some of the top end Modi
unit recruitment.
Technically you are still getting that top end Modi unit recruitment in that first.
Yeah.
So it's, it's not that you're going to see worse results necessarily, it's that you're probably not
getting the benefit of those drops you would expect.
You're probably going to see a similar benefit to just doing a single set.
Exactly, and that's my point.
And that's I think a valid point or an important point to make because when people move away from
odd drops us to doing something magical, the next step the move towards is, well, maybe not doing
something magical, but they're so efficient and you get such a high efficiency per unit of
hypertrophy or however you want to say it.
And I find that a confusing argument because if you want to talk about the most efficient thing for
per unit of hypertrophy is it would be to do.
That No, I thought you were going to say we do a different exercise.
Oh, well, well, yeah, I mean, look that, well, if I were talking about single sets, ultimately
that's where it would land one.
Yes.
Because then you can do a single set of another exercise.
Yeah.
So I'd find that an odd.
It's sort of it.
You know, you made this point when you talk about splits and you say, well, what is you know, a
what's what's I forget which split you've talked about when you said this, but you'll you'll talk
about like, what trouble is it solving?
What is it giving us that you know a difference?
I was.
Criticizing, I criticized this, the classic upper lower split four days a week and said, what
problem is it solving?
It's not solving anybody's problem in the context of bodybuilding.
It's not solving anybody's problem, you know, so, but you know, we've, we've talked about volumes as
well before and said, ultimately, you know, doing more than one set per exercise starts to kind of
become questionable.
If you're really trying to be, you know, maximising the value of everything that you do in a
workout, you're much better off doing separate exercises rather than doing additional search for the
same exercise.
And it, it all kind of, you know, kind of is, is answering the same kind of questions as what are
you trying to achieve in the workout that you're doing.
You know, if you're trying to achieve the maximum total amount of hypertrophy across the body, then
you want to be doing single sets of a lot of exercises that's going to get you to that goal.
And you want to get maximum routine accruent in every single one of those sets.
The issue that we've got with drop sets is that those additional drop sets are just like doing more
volume, except it is an even lower level of recruitment in those additional sets because the rest
periods are shorter than you would be getting by just doing, you know, kind of multiple sets of the
same exercise.
So not only are you getting hit by this redundancy issue, but you're getting hit with it, you know,
harder because you're losing some of that recruitment in those later sets to a greater degree than
you would be dealing with just doing multiple set protocols of the same exercise.
So, you know, as I say, I think there's, there's this really interesting kind of small area where it
becomes usable.
And, and, and I don't, I don't want to kind of just sort of say never do drop sets.
I could easily make that case if I wanted to.
I'm not going to do that.
But I think I think there's, there's definitely a, you know, a way to program them that is perfectly
illustrated by, you know, that the the routine that we started with.
Yeah, I mean, OK, fine.
Maybe maybe, you know, it's not essential to leave those reps in reserve on that first set.
Maybe you could train to failure on that first set, especially if you're using, you know, small
muscle mass exercise, you know, but ultimately trying to lean in the direction of heavier loads,
leaving a little bit of rest and not doing too many of them, I think probably makes it work.
And then as I say, population wise, I'd probably be sticking with Gen.
Pop most of the time for those kind of because I think honestly, that's when it makes sense because
you know, you want to be able to get a lot of things done in a short period of time, you know?
I mean, we had that conversation last week.
We talked about circuits and you're saying, well, you've got 45 minutes, how do you get the most
bang for buck?
Well, this should be another method one could use to get more bang for buck.
Totally, totally.
So I don't want to say that, you know, drop sets should never be done.
I'm I'm, I would say I would, I would, I would never program them in, in, in competitive
bodybuilding, but in in, in the, in the context of Gen. pop, I think they're absolutely usable for
the purpose of making a more time efficient work out.
But again, as I say, trying to lean in the direction of making it a little bit more effective
because when you look at the literature as it stands at the moment, you, you kind of really do
question whether the drop set protocols of doing anything after that first set has been completed.
So you know, you start to say, well, I'm going to have to modify this to get some value out of it.
And the modifications are going to be to try and reduce that superspinal and spinal CST, which means
leaving a little bit of a rest and you know kind of luring on the heavier load end of the spectrum
and obviously not doing silly ball rooms.
You said a couple of times you would never program them for competitive bodybuilders.
I was going to ask you, is there any world where you would program them, but you've kind of, you
know, not conceded, but you know, allowed for some circumstances where that would make sense.
I'm not going to ask that question, but what I would ask is would you ever program clusters for
competitive bodybuilders?
That's a really interesting question.
So, so first of all, I would, I would not dismiss it.
So if somebody else was programming them, I'd be like, OK, that's really interesting.
Tell me how you doing.
I wouldn't be like, no, I don't think you should do that.
It would, it would be, it would be an I would be curious and I would be wanting to know.
So personally I wouldn't, but the main reason behind that would be that I'm always trying to get
information about whether the protocol is working.
So when I, when I, when I kind of talk to people about competitive bodybuilding programming, my, my
kind of emphasis is always, I'm always emphasizing to them, how are you checking that your program
is working?
That's always what I keep saying to them, Like, how do you know that you're, I do this with athletic
training programs as well.
I mean, it's not limited to competitive bodybuilding, but any scenario in which the person is
competitive for whatever reason, I'm always asking the question, what is your feedback loop?
What is your feedback loop for establishing whether your program is working?
And part of the reason I do this is because I think it's the right thing to do, just objectively.
So interestingly, you get a lot of this with in business as well.
So if you read about business theory, a lot of what they'll say to you is, and I don't read about
business theory because I'm interested in business.
I, I, I don't apply any of it whatsoever.
I'm, I'm not remotely interested in it, but I, I, I do come across it and it is interesting to, to
see it described.
They'll talk about feedback loops.
So they'll say, does your business have a built in feedback loop that tells you whether or not
you're doing what is working or does it have feedback loops that are opaque to you?
Because a lot of businesses have opaque feed loops that you can't really see whether they're working
very easily.
Some have incredibly strong feedback loops that force you to kind of make the business work.
And I think in in personal training and in writing programmes and programme design in general, you
can very clearly see when a training programme is designed to give you a strong feedback loop and
progressive overload is one of the best ways of making that happen.
Equally, you can see when a programme is obscuring that.
So on the athletic side, especially when I look at a programme and it's heavily periodised or if
it's got a lot of references to pretend to use one Rep Max and it doesn't have kind of any training
to failure in there at all.
Then straight away I'm kind of saying, well, that programme is either deliberately or accidentally
obscuring my ability to check whether it's working.
And then I'm, I'm suspicious immediately.
And I'm, I'm like, I don't like that programme because I don't know whether it's working and it
might be a great programme, but I don't know whether it's a great programme that immediately makes
uncomfortable.
So the same thing applies to compared to bodybuilding.
I'm like, I want the programme to give me feedback about whether or not it's working.
And when you start introducing elements of the programme that are difficult to track and clusters
are difficult to track, then straight away I'm like that, that makes me uncomfortable.
Now when you've described some of your programmes which you use clusters, you've you've fixed a lot
of that by having multiple workouts per week where you're using the same exercise, but one of the
protocols is with a cluster and the other protocol is set to failure.
So every week you get a check on whether or not the the protocol is working.
And I think that is really critical in those contexts to make sure that we don't lose the value of
search to failure or close to failure or whatever we want to do by having too much emphasis on
clusters.
So if, if somebody's programming and they're doing everything with clusters, I'm like, I'm a bit
uncomfortable about this.
I mean this, this reminds me actually about when people have asked me about using internal focus of
attention.
Internal focus retention is really, really interesting.
You can get it to produce a higher level of voting recruitment than you would do with no focus or an
external focus.
So straight away from bodybuilding point of view, what a lot of people call mine muscle connection,
which is a subset of mine, which is a subset of an internal focus, you know, is very, very
interesting and definitely worth considering.
The problem is that when you start using an internal focus retention, you stop being able to get
progressive overload tracking done properly because as soon as you try and you know, beat the
logbook, your brain starts removing the internal folks with tension to try and beat the logbook.
So it, it really doesn't kind of pan out.
So what I often say to people is if you want to use an internal focus, you've kind of got to figure
out what your perissive overload protocol is going to be and how it's going to look because you
can't do it on a set on a, on a workout by workout basis.
It won't let you.
What you could do is do like a four week period and then retest under the exact same conditions as
you started that 40 period.
And if it has worked for you, then you know that you're one of those people for whom internal focus
attention is going to work.
And you can do that and then check and then do that and then check and you can keep rolling it.
If you find that it doesn't work, then probably you need to take internal focus of attention out of
your routine.
So I think, I think it's one of those things about like for me, I'm always, I'm always kind of
thinking to myself, you know, is this programme working?
And how do I know whether it's working?
I think a lot of people assume that, you know, if you have enough knowledge and you do enough kind
of sort of work, you can get to a point where you can guarantee that your programme is always going
to have the result that you want it to.
And I don't think that's true.
I think having the ability to get feedback from your programme very, very clearly and loudly is an
incredibly important aspect of of writing training programs.
Well, especially when you're talking about that level, when you're talking about a competitive
bodybuilder who does not have realistically much capacity for growth less left at that point.
That's where you're going to be using methods to increase mode unit recruitment and you know,
provide access to growth that maybe they haven't previously been able to access.
And that's where you're going to need that feedback, especially if you're trying intermediate
lifter.
I would say you could just intelligently program something and probably be fairly safe to assume
it's going to work if you did it in an intelligent manner.
But at that level, you're going to need to be using some other tools.
Yeah, absolutely.
And, you know, it's quite likely that, you know, you'll be pushing to the point where individual
leverages are going to make a difference.
And, you know, different exercises are going to have slightly different effects from what you might
expect on average.
So this this just going to be those variances.
And without a feedback loop in place, you're never going to capture any of that information.
It's just going to be like, well, you know, it's out there.
And I can't really can't really see whether it's.
So, you know, you might say, well, we're going to try changing the incline on the bench very
slightly and see if that has an effect.
Well, OK, well, what are you going to do to monitor whether that is having the effect that you want?
And you know, I think progressive overload is one of those important tools that we're going to use
to to sort of track what's happening.
So, yeah, so clusters is I think one of those things that it can work, but it is like a it, it has a
sort of inbuilt limitations, the wrong word.
It has an inbuilt sort of downside that can be managed, but needs to be managed if we want to kind
of use it in the most efficacious way.
And interestingly enough, drop sets, while obviously not as applicable for that very advanced
clientele, don't have that same limitation that clusters have in terms of tracking progress.
Because like what I would say with my clients when we do drop sets is I just really want you to
track that first set, that first sort of like before the drop, that first failure point and
obviously still mark down your repetitions for the other mini drops because that's still going to be
motivating for you to be it's.
But in terms of progressive overload and actually seeing are we progressing strength wise, muscle
wise, really it's the first set that I'm interested in.
That's it.
Now that actually I think lends itself to a another advantage in that drop set is you mentioned mind
muscle connection and I've talked in past about combining mind muscle connection with clusters
because if you've got one method that we can't track anyway, we may as well stack multiple methods.
I think you can do the same thing with drop sets.
The first job set we're doing to failure, you're not using mind muscle connection.
Then you do your drop to mind muscle connection.
Again, we're not tracking in any way.
We may as well stack these methods.
Yeah, no, that's, that's definitely valid, you know, yeah.
And interestingly, you know, that could lead to.
So generally speaking, we lose reps when we use a internal focus.
So that would, that would then lend itself to just being able to leave a little bit more rest and
you would still be inside your target Rep range even though you'd left that bit of rest.
So, you know, I mean, ultimately I would be, I would kind of saying, you know, generally the drops
probably need to be slightly smaller than they generally are programmed to be and the rest periods
need to be slightly longer than they need to be.
But yeah, with an internal folks attention, you might be able to bridge the gap a little bit there
and start making it kind of a bit closer to the kind of percentage drops that people are generally
programming anyway.
But you know, whatever, whatever it works out does.
So yeah, no, yeah, that's totally valid.
Practically speaking, I would do about 20% drop, but if I'm going to have to go more or less, I
would go less.
And I would normally aim to also get about four or five share petitions in that drop.
But if I have to go more or less, I'm going to aim to get less fewer.
I think if we're going to earn one side or the other, that would be the way that would make more
sense.
Totally, totally.
Now the last question or, or point topic I don't know that I want to make is it is adjacent to this.
You know, sometimes people talk about mechanical drop sets and obviously that's, you know, slightly,
you know, different than what's achieving.
And we've talked about, we've done a podcast in past, we've sort of touched on mechanical drop sets
and that's where we talk about physiological drop sets.
And that's a method that I think can be programmed in a similar way where you don't actually need to
adjust the external load.
Essentially what you're doing is you're adjusting the exercise.
So that's changing the, I guess if you will internal load.
But I would look at that as essentially what we're doing is essentially it's just changing the rest
period again, right.
So for example, I would, I program sometimes mechanical drop sets where if I have people who don't
want to be doing 20 different exercises, I will fool them into doing, we're just doing 10 different
exercises, but the drop is a different variant of that exercise.
So we're going to do a set of five, a stronger variation.
So it'll be a wide grip frontal plane lap pull down, then you do you'll, you'll do your 20% load
drop and then you'll do a sagittal plane lap pull down and just get as many reps as possible.
Or in that case, you may not even need to do the job actually, because you're using stronger
variation and you've given yourself that, you know, 1015 seconds, whatever be doing, maybe you go
high if you want between those two variations.
Essentially we're seeing the same thing happen in that scenario that we would have the standard
drops that are we were just changing rest period.
There's not really.
Like, is there anything different that's happening in a mechanical drop set to a standard drop?
So the interesting thing here is that I think you are, you are slightly changing the scope of what
mechanical drop sets probably have historically referred to.
So, you know, I think a, a mechanical drop set really would be like in, in classical terms would be
moving from a glute bridge to a hip thrust.
So, you know, basic or, or the other way around, sorry.
So you do the hip thrust and then you would move to a glute bridge and you'd be able to basically
lift a kind of, you'll be stronger in that glute bridge than you are in the, in the hip thrust.
So you would be able to carry on doing repetitions.
So it kind of literally just recreates the the effect of doing drop search, except instead of
lightening the load, you're just putting yourself in a physically more advantageous position.
What you've increased the scope there to include is changing which muscle is or which region of the
muscle is actually working.
So I think that that becomes interesting because you're not suffering so much on the spinal CSD
because that's muscle specific, but you're still getting the same super spinal CSD issue.
So really again, I think that'd be one of those situations where you would say, you know, if it is,
if it is small muscle mass single joint type exercise, you could probably do that quite easily and
it wouldn't be horrible, especially if you just gave it 1520 seconds.
In contrast, if you were working with like the example you gave of lat pull downs, I would be much
more hesitant about what that second whether that second kind of exercise was actually getting any
value.
Because you think the Super spinal scene as fatigue would be too high?
Certainly in my case, if I'm doing a pulling exercise then nothing I do in the next 30 seconds after
finishing that is going to be worth anything.
I trained with someone last week who is an endurance athlete and we he's also been training for
decades in in the weight room and I got him to do a set of five lap pulls in.
Brightening, isn't it?
And then 30 seconds later.
Brightening, yeah.
He did the same load and he got 5 reps out in fact.
In.
Fact.
She got sick repetitions out, so there was a petition effect.
Same stories before I've, I used to do, I used to do strength training programs for endurance
cyclists and they just terrified me.
I, I was literally horrified by just what they could do.
It's it's, it's nuts.
Absolutely nuts.
It's interesting that when we're talking about these methods, whether it's again clusters, drop
sets, any of these efficiency type methods, there is going to be a significant individual response
to that depending on someone's cardiovascular fitness.
It's the same way we've talked about doing work out.
Yeah, it's it's the ratio of muscle mass, cardiovascular fitness, because you can get track and
field athletes who've got monstrous levels of cardio, you know, and yeah, they've also got even more
monstrous levels of muscle mass.
And so, you know, like hammer throwers, you know, something like that.
You put those guys through through like the cardio is great, but you kind of you can get them to
have a really high heart rate spike that takes a while to come by Dallion just because they've got
so much lactate producing capacity.
So I think that's that's one of those those interesting things.
But yeah, I mean like endurance cyclist and they will, they will horrify you by how quickly they
recover from a stretch in this.
Is is is frightening.
It really is.
So I guess where that lands us is something like drop sets programmed in what we would say is an
intelligent manner may have utility for certain people, maybe not competitive bodybuilders, someone
who's at the very top of what they can achieve from a hypertrophy perspective.
Probably not the person you use it with, but many other people.
There could be circumstance where it could have benefit again as an efficiency tool.
And then someone like we just talked about there who's a competitive cyclist.
Why do they need to wait long?
It like their their cluster, their job set is the same as their straight sets, basically.
Like there's there's almost no fatigue.
There's actually.
But this, this is a point that we've made previously about rest periods.
The rest periods are individual and they're not, and they're individual to the individual, and
they're also individual to the exercise.
Yes.
You can't just say 3 minutes rest period for everything for everybody.
No, I think that is some of the worst advice going around.
I like we should do a whole podcast on this.
Interestingly, interestingly that, and I know that people don't want to hear my philosophizing,
especially not about the differences between evidence and science, but that is a great example of
why science based approach to a training variable is more valuable than an evidence based approach
to a training variable because the evidence based guys will just point to the literature.
You go, you need to take 3 minutes rest and it's like, but why?
And then when you do it from a science based perspective and you say, well, this is what's happening
and suddenly you start to realise that, yeah, it's going to vary between an endurance cyclist and,
you know, a hammer thrower and it's going to vary between a biceps curl and a squat.
And it that's just because of the mechanisms that are creating the problem for the short from from
using short rest periods.
So, yeah.
But anyway, so rest periods really kind of, you know, interesting concept because they illustrate
why fatigue mechanisms are important to understand.
Yeah.
It a while ago, I remember, I think I asked you about this and I was like, why is everyone talking
about like cardio being a limiting factor for bodybuilders?
Like there's this whole thing online, like, oh, your, you know, your, your lungs and your heart are
limiting your hypertrophy gains and whatever.
And I was like, this is just ridiculous to me.
I just don't get it.
And while I still think it's overstated largely in these in some areas online, and I think that it
probably stems back to a people who are using very high levels of anabolics and have huge amounts of
muscle mass to move and probably have other, you know, heart limitations going on anyway.
I do I have conceded that in fact, when we're talking about some of these these methods, there is a
benefit to having high cardiovascular fitness, whether that's just due to how many exercises you can
do in a workout without the Super spinal CNS fatigue accumulating, whether that's drop sets, whether
that's classes, whatever.
I do think that actually for a natural bodybuilder, it does afford you some advantages.
So I don't fundamentally disagree with that, but what I but I do, what I would say is that if you
are pursuing bodybuilding or any strength sport, then I don't think your cardio will ever be able to
keep up with your ability to generate lactate.
So I've often told the story that the point when I was probably at my biggest and I was
powerlifting, I was also cycling probably like 100 miles on a Saturday morning and my cardio was
great, but I was absolutely.
Guilty.
But I, I, I heard this week that you've never stepped foot in a gym and you've you've never benched
to have any killers.
So my bench is actually pretty, has always been pretty horrible because I've got these ridiculously
orangutan arms.
So my my pulling strength is is amazing, but my my pressing is horrid.
But yeah, always my always was my weakest lift benching.
So yeah, not not great to benching, but I'm pretty good at doing one arm chins.
So yeah, but basically, yeah, very high cardio at the same point when I was doing a lot of kind of
squat, bench, deadlift, and yeah, I was gassed between sets of squats.
I mean, literally, I would do Hepburn.
I would be at the end of my Hepburn routine and I'd be lying on the floor for about 5 or 6 minutes
and I would be breathing really hard for most of that 5 or 6 minutes and I'd be miserable.
And and that again, as I'm saying, I'd probably had better cardio than than, than than than most
people really out there at that particular point in time.
Heavier way than than you would be now.
So I'm walking around about 75 kilos, 76 kilos at the moment.
So I would I would have been about 84 by then.
OK.
So, so almost 10 kilos, do you think like how much of an impact you reckon just that extra body
weight has, like if you were to sort of do obviously when you're lifting as much now?
Oh, it's, I think it's huge.
I think it makes a really, really big difference.
So like I'm, I'm, I'm always super, super happy to be even even like a kilo or so light to the lamb
at the moment.
But I would feel that difference.
I, I, I genuinely always feel more comfortable having a slightly light to body weight.
Like I think one of the things that, you know, strength, strength athletes will often say is that
there's that kind of sofa inertia that you get.
So you kind of you put a bit of you put a bit of mass on.
And like the thought of getting out of your out of your chair, out of the sofa suddenly becomes a
little bit more challenging than than not not challenging in a sense.
It's actually difficult.
But just like you think twice before you get to bring a cup of coffee, whereas, you know, for me now
I'm just super, super happy and comfortable and I enjoy being at this body weight because I will
bounce off the sofa, you know, across the room and, and I don't even think about it.
So, yeah, I think there's, there's advantages to having a, you know, a sort of slightly better kind
of kind of body weight in general in in day to life.
But we're getting way off topic here.
But yeah, no, I mean Gen. yeah, genuinely, I do feel a bit, I did notice a big difference between
those two body weights, those two extremes.
OK, I think that's if our drop set podcast.
I am I am surprised at where this conversation went.
I I thought that I would be having to justify and defend my use of drop sets more than I had to, but
I think.
I think the work was done by the routine that you brought with you from the Soviet era.
I mean, I think that's such a great illustration of what we keep saying.
And, and really, you know, it's, it's the same.
What's really interesting is that the the only criticism really that the majority of, well, not
maybe not the only criticism because it depends on what aspect of the science based lifting
community you're you're trying to criticize.
But really the main criticism that the wider fitness industry presents against the science based
lifting community as a whole, not bits of it.
I mean, you can criticize bits of it because you don't like the bits that, you know, you're focusing
on.
But as a whole, when the wider fitness industry criticized the science based lifting community,
they're basically just saying you're not doing things the way that we've been doing them for the
last couple of decades.
That's really what the criticism boils down to now.
Yeah, sure, you can pick bits out of the science based lifting community and go, well, I don't like
the way these guys are experimenting over here and I don't like the way these guys, you know, kind
of use this bit of the literature in this way, right?
And you can point to little bits of things that you don't like, but it's not representative of the
entirety of the science based of the community.
What?
But what it all warms down to is like they want to say we've been training in this particular way in
bodybuilding for the last kind of 20-30 years and you're changing that and we don't like that and
we're going to point to you and say you're not doing things the way we've been doing them.
And actually the interesting thing is that if you just go back pre anabolics, the science based
lifting community is closer to that than anything that's been done in the last 50 years.
And I think that's the really important thing to emphasize is that the reality is that science based
lifting is very, very close to silver era bodybuilding, which is the entire purpose of this podcast.
And that really defangs completely the primary argument against science based lifting because
fundamentally it's going back to a situation where steroids were not masking, you know, how strength
training works.
So, yeah, and this has been a great, great, great example of how, you know, drop sets are being
looked at in some very silly ways, really with the crazy volumes that they're being programmed.
And yet if you go back to silver era and look at a great example of how drop sets were done, it
immediately is like, well, that is literally the best way you could possibly do a drop set protocol,
you know, And that is just such a great example.
So really cool to see that today.
Really cool.
Yeah, I don't have anything to add.
That's it for us.
Thank you guys for joining us.
And we'll be back next week with a new topic.