Episode: 050 Are circuits for hypertrophy the next big thing?
URL: https://open.spotify.com/episode/1gvBj5VNb2NMXF5i0TjERR
Published: 2026-05-05
================================================================================

Welcome back, everyone.
Thank you for joining us for another episode of Hypertrophy, past and present.
Chris, how are you doing today?
Yeah, I'm doing well.
Thanks, Jake.
Good to hear I'm doing well.
I've got my cup of coffee although I'm I've only got 1 sip left.
So I I'm doing well for now but we'll see how I go in a few minutes time.
So today we are talking, we're doing a, what would you call it, a audience requested topic.
Yeah, so actually surprising number of messages when when you proposed this topic and I kind of
shared that on my Instagram stories, I was shocked by just how many people messaged staying there,
wanted to hear about it.
So yeah, tell us what it's going to be.
Which I'm happy about because almost a year ago, well, it would have been before last summer.
So, so maybe six months ago, I actually wanted to do this topic.
I don't know if I if I suggested it to you at the time because I think at the time I thought no
one's going to care, no one's going to be interested in this topic.
And so it's encouraging for me when we put it up in our stories that people are like, yeah, let's do
it 'cause I was like, fine, you've indicated, yes, let's cover this.
So there's, I think there's one big accessibility issue or practicality issue to this topic, which
is what I was concerned about and we'll cover that.
So today we're talking about circuits.
Now, there's obviously different ways that circuits look and, and obviously we're talking in the
context of hypertrophy and circuits and hypertrophy maybe don't really go together all that often.
People don't normally talk about them in the context of hypertrophy.
Maybe like group fitness stuff, people might talk about circuits and I've got some clients who
program circuits because they work in small group kind of sessions.
But an individual doing a circuit for the purpose of hypertrophy, it's not really something people
would think about all that often.
So we're gonna see where this conversation goes.
I think there's some interesting potential application that might come out of it.
It's something that I've played with for a few years now.
In fact, I don't know if you know this when we first started talking, whenever that was four years
ago, maybe something like that.
The first workout that I wrote inspired by our conversations and the mentorship was actually a
circuit.
And I did that for months.
And I'll maybe I'll talk a little bit about my experience on it when we get into this episode.
But that was inspired by your model.
And I think it makes a lot of sense with a lot of the Physiology and, and the model and that'll come
out in this conversation.
But my part of the episode is, did they do this in the silver area?
Did they do this before Anabolics?
Now we've talked about some routines which you could kind of say could be circuits depending on how
one performed them.
So a lot of the Bob Hoffman staff, the York Barbell type routines, we've talked about several of
these in past episodes.
And the way they tended to work was you would do a single set, you would do your 11:50 exercises.
And then after you've done all that, it was your choice.
Do you wanna add another set?
Do you wanna go again?
Do you wanna add another 10 or 12 exercises onto it?
And so you've kind of got this, you know, 2 biceps exercises, 2 triceps exercises and, and have like
a slight variant.
And so there was a component to that, which was kind of like circuit esque.
And again, we've covered this before.
I kind of wanted to go down a different path and talk about other ways that circuits were being
done.
But I, I would just comment on that style, the Hoffman York barbell style routine where the single
set potentially being repeated is a lot of that was done, I guess, kind of out of necessity.
You know, the, what's is it Plato, Aristotle, one of them, the you're looking at me with wide eyes.
I think it's Plato, the the father of invention is necessity, something along those lines.
And I think that's why these guys tended to go more towards this sort of circuit style is because a
lot of these routines would be done with a single barbell.
You'd have multiple people doing them together, you know, that were being done like in military
training that were being done.
And so they were the exercises are grouped in a way where you could have, you know, a few people,
you perform the exercises, use one barbell, then you could increase the weight on the barbell for
the next few exercises.
And it just kind of worked out that way.
So while I think they're really good examples of silver era circuits, I look at them as well.
Did they do this 'cause it was most effective or just because it worked for their, their time
period?
So I wanted to look at an example of a circuit which wasn't just done out of accessibility and
necessity and and convenience.
And this was actually, this was actually written in a book by John McCallum in the 60s.
Now, John McCallum, not like a bodybuilder didn't compete, but he wrote a lot about bodybuilding and
mostly in the 60s, you know, contributed a lot to magazines.
He wrote keys to to progress, I think was the the name of his sort of main book.
He also wrote like the a book on the 20 Rep squats and this workout is contained in his book, but
bodybuilders had been doing it in the 50s as well.
So this workout as written, it was published after anabolics had started to be introduced.
They weren't really widespread yet, but it is a heart back to a routine or style of routine that had
been used in the decade prior and this type of training.
I don't know if you've heard about this, Chris.
They called it PHA, which was peripheral heart action.
Now supposedly they'd actually borrowed this from gymnasts or, or some other field.
It wasn't a bodybuilding thing to begin with, but they sort of sort of Co opted it and, and used it
in bodybuilding.
And essentially it's just circuits.
So the way that this circuit worked and this was for bodybuilders, this was for for hypertrophy,
this consisted of groupings of exercises.
And so it is obviously as wasn't the norm.
It is full body and it's repeated 3 * a week.
And the first grouping of exercises was a front squat and this was actually done for 12 repetitions,
which is pretty, pretty high for front squat.
And then it went to a what they call a cuddle sit up, a variation of a sit up for 25 repetitions and
then barbell curls for 10 repetitions and then seated twist.
So, you know, seat it down with like a broomstick or barbell and, and doing that sort of twisting
oblique exercise for 25 repetitions.
And then a restless bridge, which I've N have you ever seen anyone actually do a restless bridge?
No, I've, I've only seen photos of it in these old books.
I've never seen anyone do it.
For anyone who's not familiar with it.
It's basically imagine like a, a glute bridge position, but now imagine you're actually lifting
yourself off your shoulders as well onto your head.
So it's they talked about as like a neck strengthening exercise.
Anyway, that was big in the bronze era.
It kind of got carried over into silver era.
So that was the last of the exercises in that particular grouping.
Then he would go on to the next grouping which was inclined dumbbell press for 10 repetitions, sit
ups for 25 reps, A sagittal plain barbell row for 12 repetitions, and then a bent forward twist.
So again, this kind of like oblique type exercise for 25 repetitions and then concluded with a
standing calf raise for 15.
And then he had one more grouping and he would do a prone hyperextension for 12 repetitions, a leg
raise for 25 reps Again, obviously no machines at this point.
Yeah, so you know, we've got some direct fem work in here.
Then A1 military press with a dumbbell for 10 repetitions, a side bend for 25 repetitions and a
close grip bench for 10 repetitions.
Now the way these little phase groupings were done is he would work through the the the group of
exercises, the five exercises.
He would do a warm up set, so about 50% ish of his working weight.
This is very similar to what Dredge Park used to do.
He would then work through them again with a heavier load, but still a a sort of a warming up type
load.
And then he would do his work sets and he would do 3 work sets.
So he would work through all these exercises in in the PA, the Group One kind of exercises of five
exercises.
He would do them for the workload or work set.
He'd repeat them again twice more.
And then he would move on to the next grouping, do those five exercises, repeat them twice more and
then move to the last grouping.
So it's a big workout.
There's quite a lot of volume.
It's there's obviously a intentional pattern here in how he structured some of these exercises.
So generally there would be a we've, you can see a multi joint exercise and then he adds in kind of
like a core exercise, ABS, oblique, something like that.
And then he tended to go into a single joint exercise after that first multi joint and then added in
more core oblique, something like that.
And then another, I mean dresses, bridge calf, Ray's Collie, St. bench, it kind of varied for that
last exercise.
I think there's quite a lot to unpack here.
Obviously there's the excise selection, which we can talk about and we talked about that a lot
anyway.
And you know, this is a fairly robust excise selection program.
There's no hamstring work always with the, the hyper extensions.
So that's not too bad.
There's no, you're not gonna like the no frontal plane pull down or pull up.
But apart from that, the excise selection is pretty robust.
But let's talk a little bit about the format.
What stands out to you here?
So just to be clear then, what we're talking about is 15 exercises of which two in the first group
are kind of a little unconventional or not not unconventional, just generally not referenced in
modern day bodybuilding so much.
So we've got sit ups and these seated twists.
And then in the second group, we've got bent forward twists and sit ups again.
And the third, third group, we've got prone hyperextensions and side bends.
So each each kind of group, we've got 2 exercises that probably wouldn't fit into a modern day
bodybuilding program, at least as written.
A lot of people do kind of AB work.
They just kind of write it as AB work at the end of whatever workout they're doing.
So he's a little leg raised in that last sort of grouping as well.
I'm kind of.
Extension as a I'm kind of treating the leg raisers.
So I think I'm kind of happy with that.
So what I'm saying is, out of the kind of 15 exercises, probably 6 are not really kind of the same
as what we would kind of be programming.
The hype extension would be done on a flat bench and so that would have been OK.
So.
It's kind of like a horizontal back extension.
It's a horizontal back extension, yeah.
But in the last group you've kind of got, you know, maybe just the one kind of strange exercise that
would drop out.
But Even so, I mean, just starting from the point, we've got 15 exercises of three sets per
exercise.
That's monstrous as, as, as a workout session volume.
And, and just to be clear, we've been over this before.
I think it was one of the recent episodes we did.
The amount of session volume that you do, if it's spread out across enough places isn't necessarily
a problem.
A lot of people go, oh, well, if you do enough kind of sort of sets of anything, then you're going
to have a large amount of post workout, you know, recovery time before you can do another session.
And it doesn't work like that because what you're thinking is like, oh, because I've worked really
hard, therefore it's going to take a lot of time to recover.
It's like, well, no, what you're what you're actually, what actually determines your recovery time
is per muscle basis, how much damage you create.
And so you can do a lot of work, but if you're staying away from failure, you're not using stretch
position exercises and you spread it across enough places, then actually, no, you can do a lot of
work and it's not problematic.
I mean, you're basically describing a manual job at this point.
It's not, it's not, it's not possible.
It's not difficult to get around that problem.
But here we have got a lot of session volume and I think a lot of people today will probably find
that quite uncomfortable and OK, so and and also the repetitions are quite high.
So I'd be kind of interested in just how close to failure he was going with each of those work sets.
My guess is he's probably stopping with a report to in reserve.
Unfortunately, they tend not to talk much about that.
You know, often they'll say as as much what do they say?
As much poundage as you can handle, I think they say, which to me sounds close to failure.
But they also often will talk about not reducing the load between sets when they're doing multi
sets.
Yeah.
So I assume we're talking probably repitude and reserve for.
I think so.
Yeah, I think so.
So, So, yeah.
So really first things that jump out at me, slightly odd exercise selection in terms of there being
these kind of unconventional kind of AB and oblique exercises thrown in the mix.
Very high session volume, high reps, you know, on many of those exercises.
So, yeah, I think I think it's an interesting, an interesting kind of workout to look at, but it's
quite a long way away from what I think would be would be ideal in most in most circumstances.
You know, I think this is kind of one of those workouts where, you know, people are going to feel it
in terms of immediately walking out the gym afterwards.
They're going to feel like they work really hard.
How much hypertrophy you're actually going to stimulate for that feeling as you walk out the gym and
think is a separate question.
You know, I think there's there's probably a lot of kind of weirdness in here isn't going to really
work out that well.
So what do you think is the biggest drawback here?
So for me, I'll look at this and I'm like, well, exercise wise, we've got the squat and we've got
the rec firm exercise with the leg ray.
So quads are taken care of.
The hype extension, OK, We've got some hamstring work in there, which is not bad.
I'm not sure you have really because it's more of a glute exercise like you said before.
Yeah, it is more of a glute, Yeah.
I mean it's it's bare minimum, sure.
But again, we would expect that with silvery guys.
Yeah, We just keep going back to the same observation, which is why did they just not put a stiff
leg deadlift in here because it'd be so much better.
But anyway.
And then aside from that, you know, we've got a curl, OK, great.
We've got close grip bench.
Great.
You know, obviously we don't have any cable work in here, so we're missing some long head triceps,
long haired.
We've got two, one or two.
We've got one shoulder exercise that's covered.
We've got the incline bench, so that's kind of you've got to back it.
So it's kind of one exercise per muscle group, really.
Well, the interesting thing is you do have 3 pressing exercises and you've only got 1 pulling
exercise.
So there's that interesting imbalance there because I straight away would drop one of the presses
and put a frontal plane, pull it and then immediately it would be way better routine.
Yeah.
Well, especially the the one our military and the close grip, you would think that they're doing,
there's a, there's a large amount of overlap with those two exercises the way they normally would do
that one, our military would actually be quite sagittal playing as well.
And then obviously the close grip bench press.
So that is an interesting choice for those two exercises, I will grant that.
I mean, honestly, you could, you could reorganize those pressing exercises to do a better job
because you could do a behind the neck press and you could do a close grip bench and you'd have
immediately a much better coverage.
So again, I think exercise selection is not amazing.
But then, as I said at the beginning, there's some really weird kind of choices around, you know, AB
work and oblique work in here, which seems to be a huge emphasis and I don't really get why.
Yeah.
So let's talk about some of the AB work there.
So if he's interspersed it kind of one, it'll sort of be a multi joint exercise give or take, then
an AB exercise and maybe a generally maybe a smaller exercise and then another AB, AB exercise.
It's almost like the AB exercise is is breaking up the other exercises.
I think that's the really important observation, isn't it?
So you know what, what we're seeing then is a deliberate kind of strategic approach to exercise
order.
And I think that's probably where the circuit conversation gets interesting.
And especially some of these exercises like the seated twist, the side bend, I mean, I can only
assume these are not going to be overly demanding bent forward twist.
In the video, in the videos, in the photos I've seen in the text I've written where people are doing
these exercises, they don't typically talk about them as overly demanding exercise.
It's usually done as a bit of a warm up or, you know, often when people are programming them for the
purpose of whatever they're trying to achieve, they're using, they're doing, you know, 100
repetitions plus, right.
So if we're talking 25 seater twists, I, I don't think this is going to be a, a Max effort exercise.
I assume it is some kind of pacesetter within this group of exercises.
Now, the question for me would be looking at these, you know, observe 15 exercises minus give or
take 5 exercises that are, you know, a little bit fluffy.
Are we getting anything novel or is he getting anything, you know, special by doing these as a
circuit compared to just working through and doing one set of each of these exercises or compared to
working through these as as straight sets and doing his, you know, multi sets of, of the squats and
then doing his multi sets of the sit ups and then of the curls.
How would those different formats change what results someone's getting?
So I mean, if we start with the first group where you you've got your kind of squats at the
beginning.
If if someone's doing multiple sets of squats, then you are probably going to find that you're going
to need a long rest period before you can do another set of squats.
And because of the inherently cardiovascularly demanding nature of that big multi joint exercise,
it's going to be hit quite hard by any previous kind of cardiovascular sensations that you've got
floating around the system.
So unless you're prepared to literally kind of sit for 5 minutes and do nothing, or just walk slowly
backwards and forwards like I used to do all.
All longer I told you about my little.
Well, I kind of, I tell people when I was, I keep telling the same story when I was doing Hepburn,
which I did for 18 months, two years.
And yeah, by the time I got to the end of that kind of eight, eight sets, even though I was only
doing two or three reps per set, I was lying on the floor for about 7 minutes, you know, between
sets.
And it was brutal.
And I think that's that's just one of the things that you have to kind of take into account with
with with squats.
So yeah, I mean, if you tried to do three sets of front squats with 12 reps per set, I think you'd
be sitting around quite a lot between sets waiting for the next kind of set if you wanted to avoid
the cardiovascular problem.
Presumably doing the front squat using a lot less load than if one was in your back squat.
Presumably there'd be a slightly less cardiovascular demand of that exercise with their.
Very probably, but I've never done 12 reps of a front squat so.
No, I've still got baked into me from Charles Polk when saying never do more than six repetitions in
the front score.
I tend not to well.
I don't think I ever did more than three.
I think that was probably enough.
But yeah, I mean, ultimately, yeah, the point, the point is it's a big kind of muscle mass exercise.
And yeah.
So if you then program something that isn't so dependent on or is it not dependent, isn't so
influenced by the cardiovascular system?
I mean, like just leaving aside this exercise selection for a moment, you know, leaving aside the
sit ups and kind of oblique work.
If you kind of said, well, OK, I'm going to do front squats and then I'm going to give myself 3
minutes and then I'm going to do some kind of biceps curls, even single arm biceps curls.
You could do.
I mean, that would be an interesting idea because you'd, you'd feel very little affected by the
cardiovascular kind of sensations at that point, even though they're, even though they were still
there.
You could do single arm biceps curls.
You could just do that and you could actually do both arms separated by kind of 90 seconds or
whatever.
And then by the time you kind of done that, you might be ready to do another set of front squats or
you could then go on something like an incline bench or, you know, something like that.
And I think that's that's where it gets interesting with exercise selection.
It's really the same conversation we had before regarding excise selection.
You know, can we order, sorry, not exercise selection, exercise order.
Can we order exercises in a way that basically means that the sequence of exercises allows us to
recover of cardiovascular sensations because the what we do is we have a cardiovascularly demanding
exercise and then we drop in something at the opposite end of the spectrum, you know.
So going from a front squat all the way down to a single arm biceps curl, you can get away with
doing that single arm biceps curl with a little of the cardiovascular sensation still present.
And it really isn't going to limit the number of reps you can do very much at all.
That's actually one of my favorite pairings.
If I if I ever pair squat with anything, more often than not it'll be a biceps curl.
I think so, because the reality is the elbow flexor group is surprisingly small compared to what it
looks like.
You know, it, it's just got such an amazing moment on.
It sticks out so far away from the bone that it becomes incredibly visible.
And so we kind of focus on it as if it's a thing.
It's like, oh wow, it's you know, it's such a prominent muscle, but the reality is it's only
prominent because it sticks out.
It doesn't actually have that much size to it volume wise.
It's very small.
You know, one of the most fascinating things from biomechanical point of view is just how the
triceps and the biceps produce very similar elbow flexion and extension torques in each direction.
But the triceps does it with with size and minimal moment on, and the biceps group does it with
moment on and actually fairly minimal size.
So you're getting similar torques in opposing directions, but in very, very different ways.
So yeah, I think it's probably the best kind of choice.
I mean, having said that, if people wanted to kind of say, well, I want to do this, but I don't want
to do kind of whole, you know, all, all, all of my kind of upper and lower parts of the body in the
same kind of part of the workout or in the same workout or whatever.
So OK, we could do calf raises then.
I mean, I think that would probably be the lower body equivalent.
Yeah, although if you were then going back to a squat, I suspect the calf phrase this the soleus is.
Probably.
I mean, yeah, maybe if you did, if you did them in a kind of a leg press toe, press toe or a
standing calf race to keep the gas truck as the primary kind of component, stayed in the bottom half
the range of motion and even did single leg and you probably I'm not saying it's better than doing
biceps.
I think biceps still probably a.
Better.
Yeah, absolutely.
Just kind of like actually a single leg calf, single leg leg curl.
I guess like a standing leg curl or something like that.
If I'm.
Going to be interesting as well.
Yeah, that would be interesting as well because again, you know, hamstrings aren't going to get
really any kind of meaningful activity in a in a squat.
So that'd be pretty cool.
Now you didn't really answer my question.
So if we were to do this as running through it, single sets, all the exercises, I mean that would
that would kind of be the same as what we've seen in a lot of these silver plants.
Yeah, single sets.
Obviously we've talked about the value of single sets being the most stimulating that first set.
There's probably not a lot we need to say about that.
But if we compared that to them doing it as multi sets, straight sets or as groupings circuit style
like this.
OK, what?
Different outcome are we seeing?
OK, so let's abstract ourselves very slightly from, as you said, from this precise routine and say,
OK, maybe maybe we pick 12 exercises that we like and you know somebody wants to do those for
multiple sets, whether that's two or three sets.
We've got good exercise selection.
We've got a couple of multi joints in there.
They don't have to be squats, they don't have to be kind of free weight stuff.
They could be machines maybe and we're happy with our exercise selection.
We're just going we've got capacity to do maybe 2.
Maybe some people have got capacity to do 3.
That would be 36 sets or 3036 sets for a workout.
That's a lot, but OK, maybe if people want to do that, they can make it happen.
What's different then between doing that as all the way through, you know, one set, then all the way
through another set, then all the way through a third set or just top at two, it doesn't matter.
Or conversely, doing all of your sets for each exercise sequentially before you get further on?
Well, the first thing that jumps out to me if you do that is that you are creating a smaller excise
order effect that is negative on your later sets of later exercises.
So if you go through all the way from, you know, say you do your kind of sequence all the way
through once, then by the time you get to the end of that first round, if you like, then obviously
you've got some degree of exercise order effect.
But it's smaller than it would be if you'd done every single set for every single exercise before
you got to the end.
So if you're doing calf raises last, like a lot of people tend to do, then if you do everything else
first, you've done like 30, three sets before you get to that point of doing calf razors.
That's a pretty chunky excise order effect.
Now, again, we've talked about this in the past.
It doesn't have to be, you know, kind of monumental if you're training correctly, you're leaving
rest periods, you're training with relatively low reps Got a lot of, you know, kind of thought goes
into avoiding the exercise order effect.
I'm not avoiding but limiting the exercise order effect, you know.
And again, you can test the magnitude of this if you want to by just doing the exercise at the
beginning or the end and seeing how you do.
But yeah, you can have a small exercise order effect on your first set of car phrases if you just
have 11 sets rather than 30, three sets in this example.
So I think straight away we're getting an interesting kind of benefit in the sense that you do get
kind of a more even distribution of, I'm not saying it is even because you can't get an even one
because you can't do every single exercise set first.
But you get a more even spread of distribution of Motine recruitment across or relative Motine
recruitment.
I guess percentage volunteer activation across all of those first sets for each muscle group than
you would do if you ran through in order and did multiple sets, you know, kind of exercise by
exercise by exercise.
So I think straight away that's interesting.
So just to conclude with that point though, so then what you're what you'd expect to see would be
that in a normal situation where you're just doing these straight sets, those first few exercises,
you might progress better on those than what you would do if you were to do it like a circuit.
But in that normal situation the last exercises you may find your progress stalls or it's bit
lackluster.
Hang on a minute.
Let me let me just back up just slightly and I've so far I've only argued it in One Direction.
So, so far what I've argued is that the exercises that you're doing towards the end of your sequence
will be better off if you do a circuit style compared to if you do normal straight sets and just
work your way through all exercises 1 by 1 by 1 and 2 at the end.
I think that's definitely true that the exercise order effect is helping you, not helping you.
The exercise order effect is worse if you do your normal straight set protocol and ignore the
circuits.
You do circuits, the exercise order effect is going to be smaller.
Going the other way and saying well, OK, does that mean then that let's say I'm doing close grip
bench is my first exercise.
OK, so I do my bench press first and if I do it as a circuit, I do one set of bench and then I do
all my other exercises.
Then I come back and do a second set of bench.
What happens to that second set of bench?
Is it better or is it worse as it, is it a better stimulus or is it a smaller stimulus than if I did
three sets of bench all in a row before I continued?
And I think that actually is a harder question to answer.
Now, if you go back 10 years, 15 years, then most people would say, well, clearly doing three sets
of bench, you know, one set after the other is going to be more stimulating than doing one set, than
doing a whole bunch of other exercises and then coming back and doing a second set.
But that's because they thought the fatigue was stimulating and it's not.
And that's the problem.
What we have to do is we have to drill down into the fatigue mechanisms and go, what is happening
here that is going to be negative for me.
Now let's break it down basically to, to, to, to kind of to kind of look at this categorically.
You can say there's going to be two major categories of fatigue mechanism.
There's going to be central nervous system and there's going to be peripheral.
And then within those, you can then break it down one step further and you can say be super spinal
and spinal in the CNS and there's going to be calcium I related and metabolite related inside the
muscle.
OK.
So if I do, if I look at the CNS side, on the CNS side, spinal CNS fatigue probably can be ignored
in the context of strength training.
If we're leaving a couple of minutes rest it it that's not 100% true and it does have a long tail to
it.
But ultimately for these purposes, let's let's kind of just park it super spinal fatigue.
In the in the context of like a circuit where we're doing shorter rest periods potentially will how
we're going to see like a a significant impact on diminishing spinal fatigue within well within.
Seconds.
Yeah, yeah.
I mean, ultimately spinal sensitique is probably the reason why a lot of early fatigue studies
failed to capture the full magnitude of CNFT.
If you go back kind of 20 years, a lot of CNFT, a lot of studies that were measuring CNFT or trying
to measure CNFT didn't do, weren't successful.
I'm not going to say they didn't do a very good job because that's rude.
They did obviously a very good job.
They just didn't understand that they were missing something.
Researchers have done a lot of work in the last kind of decade or so on capturing the magnitude of
CNST at that point because the decay is so quick upon stopping that we tend to underestimate just
how much CNST is present.
So if you look back kind of 1520 years, the general prevailing opinion was that CNST maybe was about
kind of sort of 4050%, maybe a bit less in the context of kind of quite fatiguing strength training
situations and maybe more like 78% in the context of cardiovascular situations.
And those numbers have gone up really since then.
And CNST is now generally regarded as being a lot more important even than that simply because we've
got the ability to now measure CNST at the moment of the exercise cessation literally by doing the
exercise in the apparatus that you're going to test in.
So you kind of sit in there dynamometer, and the instant that you get to task failure, the
electrodes start stimulating the muscle to do the launch activation measurement and you get an
instantaneous CNST kind of assessment.
And that's really, really important because if you do the safe cycling exercise and then you ask the
subject to get off the bike and walk across the room and sit on the volunteer.
Yeah, exactly.
Sit on the dynamometer and set up all the electrodes and 5 minutes later you start.
Exactly.
It was literally recording like a massive, massive kind of underestimation of what the actual true
CNS fatigue was at Tuspedia.
So they've done an amazing job of fixing that problem.
And now when you look at the more modern studies, they're like horrified by just how massive the CNS
fatigues kind of effects are.
You know, it's way higher than we used to kind of believe it was.
O ultimately, yeah, basically CNS fatigue.
I think in the context of strength training, spinal CNS fatigue is probably going to have mostly
dissipated.
I mean, it does have a long tail out to about 10-15 minutes.
But honestly, you can probably kind of sort of dismiss it most of the time for what we're talking
about.
South Superspinal really is going to be quite similar or OK, not similar in the sense yeah, it.
So it really depends on your other exercises.
If, if you would do it, let's say you were doing only say 5 or 6 exercises and they're all multi
joint.
Then basically you'd probably find that your superspinal CNS fatigue being primarily influenced by
cardiovascular and and inflammation kind of signalling it's probably going to be pretty similar per
set.
So in that, in that scenario, in that context, you would have say, okay, I'm going to do one set of
bench followed by a second set of bench.
Okay, yeah, CNS fatigue as long as you've left similar rest periods is probably going to be less in
the multi set protocol compared to the circuit protocol because you maybe done 5 or 6 other
exercises instead of just the one.
If you were doing the 12, but your 12 consisted of a lot of single joint stuff, then that would
start to change because you'd like you'd have some recovery space like literally what we were
talking about in the front squat versus the followed by the bicep scale.
So if you had some intelligent exercise order and you were doing some multi joint followed by some
single joint and you were allowing yourself to, you know, kind of almost recover a little bit as you
went through.
You might find that say with three 3 minutes rest or sort of maybe 4 minutes rest, you actually
weren't in a such a bad state by the time you'd done 11 other exercises before you came back and did
the bench again.
I mean, I, I think genuinely it probably would be worse from a super spinal CNST point of view, but
I don't think it would be necessarily as much worse as you might predict simply if you had left
those kind of single joint exercises along the way.
So I think it really depends.
I mean, like if you're kind of, as I say, if you're doing like A5 or A6 exercise protocol where
you're doing sort of something like a, you know, bench followed by a pull up followed by a leg press
followed, you know, stiff leg deadlift or something like that, then yeah, I think you probably would
be in a worse shape.
Well, that's you've just described a death circuit that Charles Polkman.
Used to program, yeah.
I mean the name kind of gives it away so.
Yeah.
And I've I've vomited doing that exact workout.
So I can only assume with the perception of effort would have been doing that.
So absolutely if you're doing these, you know, heavy multi joint exercises and that was, I mean we
used to do, I think it'll be 10 to 12 repetitions to failure just of these big compound lifts.
Yeah.
I mean, The thing is you're, you're kind of playing around with lactate shuttling there because
ultimately the way the lactate shuttle works is that you're working muscle pumps lactate out into
the bloodstream and it's got to go somewhere.
It's got to go somewhere if you start and, and the way that you classify it is that muscles are
either lactate producing or lactate consuming, or at least fibers are anyway.
And if you have a load of muscle fibers that are lactate producing and then they're going to go
looking around the body for other fibers that are lactate consuming, which is any muscle that you're
not working.
If you then start working those other muscles and make them lactate.
Yeah, you get the idea.
And it would be programmed so it would be upper body and then lower body and then upper and then.
Lower, because what you're trying to do is, yeah, you're trying to exacerbate that problem by
basically making every muscle in the body lactate producing.
So the lactate just sits in the bloodstream going.
We need a way out, guys.
Where would you want us to go?
And there's no effort to go.
So it just sits there making you miserable, hence the vomiting.
So is that a good idea?
No, not really, certainly not from a CNS fatigue point of view, but yeah, we're trying to do the
opposite of that really.
So yeah, I think again, context wise, if you're doing your circuits as like a bunch of multi joint
exercises, like 5 or 6 multi joint exercises to cover the whole body that we've talked about in the
past.
I think that, you know, it would be very challenging to to argue that that was doing a better job
than just doing multiple sets, straight sets and then proceeding on to the next kind of exercise.
I think that would be not not helpful.
But if you're doing more like sort of 11:50 and you've got some single joint stuff in there.
And actually I don't think it's quite so clear cut whether that second set of benches much, much
better being done in a traditional straight set protocol compared to being done in a in a normal
kind of situation.
So yeah.
What I think is interesting about this is you could program it either way to make it better or
worse.
So I actually think the way a lot of people program it would be potentially worse off doing it as
straight sets because I think we've had this conversation before that some multi joint exercises.
I think people are under doing the rest periods.
And so if we are talking something like a squat, maybe even a bench or a pull up, then I reckon a
lot of people are going to be under doing that for rest period wise.
And so doing multi sets back-to-back, they're probably going to be having more negative impact in
those later sets than if someone were to program a circuit and have some of these biceps exercises.
Even the way the example we started with, we had, you know, core exercise, bicep exercise, twists,
whatever, go back to the squat.
I think that's going to have less of an impact on this.
Yeah.
And you could, you could try and meet that halfway and you could do exactly what you were mentioning
earlier, which is to pair your front squat with a biceps curl.
And so you could do that pairing and then move on to a second pairing where you were doing, say
bench press and calf race.
You know, so you could, I mean, pairing them might be kind of an interesting way of doing it rather
than necessarily circuits.
But again, it it depends on what you're trying to do, because if you paired them, then you'd be
losing that thing that I mentioned at the beginning, which is the.
Exercise order.
The exercise order kind of gives you a much kind of more even distribution of stimulus across all of
your working muscles instead of, you know, kind of just applying it much more to the ones at the
beginning of your workout, much less to the ones at the end.
So there's this.
Swings and roundabouts.
That's a question a lot of people tend to ask as well.
I often get people saying can I change the exercise order each work out because they don't wanna,
you know, develop some kind of imbalance or whatever.
And obviously the the limitation or the concern is, well, it's gonna be a lot harder just in terms
of tracking and progress and I'm gonna wait to use and things like that.
But this sort of circuit idea is probably a a nice middle ground because you've got consistency in
doing the same exercises in that order each time, but you're less impacted by that exercise order.
When I've done this in past, what I've done is 2 sets per exercise, so I'll work through the circuit
twice.
But what I do is I I work through say 10 exercises, so one to 10 and then I work backwards again.
So my 10th exercise gets done twice in a row.
I take a a few minutes off and I start again going backwards because obviously that 10th exercise is
still going to be the most impacted by that exercise order.
Then the first exercise.
So I figure I'll give it sets 10 and 11 instead of sets 10 and 20.
You always have to find a way to do things differently.
Do you?
That's actually really, that's actually really interesting.
I'll have to think about that.
I never, I never kind of thought about doing that.
Yeah, OK.
Yeah, actually that that allows me to kind of finish the analysis that I was doing earlier because I
was saying basically you've got these two major categories of fatigue mechanism, central and
peripheral, and you can subdivide each of them into two, which is superspinal and spinal, which
we've talked about, and then calcium ion related and metabolite related.
Now generally speaking, we don't need to worry too much about metabolite related fatigue.
It doesn't really create any problems for bodybuilding unless it gets to the level where it triggers
superspinal, which is obviously superspinal.
But calcium amylate fatigue, the way that I've modelled it is that it basically reduces mechanical
tension and it isn't really possible to dissipate it that much between sets.
Well, if you look at the recovery rates of calcium I'm related T mechanisms as a whole, So I've
talked about this quite a few times before, but very quickly, the standard way of measuring all
calcium I'm related T mechanisms together is a measurement called low frequency fatigue.
It picks up pretty much all of the calcium I'm related T mechanisms that happen.
So some people kind of label it as one or the other.
They'll label it as excitation, injection, coupling failure, for example.
Not really true.
It kind of picks up all of them as a group.
If you look at the recovery profile of that FT mechanism, it does have a little bit of a kind of
initial recovery and then it flatlines.
So it's probably not fair to model it exactly the way that I model it.
But ultimately, I don't have a good model for what's happening in that first kind of couple of
minutes.
But it does look like we do get some degree of recovery there.
I'm just not sure really what's going on.
It might be an interaction.
A number of people have done some work on the interactions between metabolite related fatigues and
calcium I'm related fatigues.
So it could just be that you're what you're seeing there is the interaction between the two with I
mean some people have proposed that even phosphates can create a calcium essentially a calcium I'm
related fatigue mechanism.
So it could be Physiology is messy.
So you could see a bit of interaction there and it might be that we are getting some mechanical
tension recovery from that dissipation of calcium ilate T in the first couple of minutes.
In that scenario, you would basically say, well, OK, that is what we would benefit from avoiding by
doing circuits versus doing straight sets.
Because if I do my bench and I've got a little bit of calcium Ilate T that is recoverable and the
vast the majority is not.
But if I'd have some of that that is recoverable, then I do my circuit and then come back and do a
second to the bench.
Then obviously I've then recovered from that and I'm able to get a little bit more attention than I
would have done the first time.
So in that regard, I think that's where things get interesting because what you're now saying is
potentially I can win a little bit back that I wouldn't necessarily have got.
Honestly, a lot of people are going to stop there and they're going to go, oh, right, OK.
So you know, there's a benefit.
But honestly, if you're thinking long term about your training, and I would urge people to do this,
if you're thinking about long term about your training, don't think too much about mechanical
tension at the fibre level.
As long as, as long as it's happening, don't think too much about the magnitude of that.
Because really what matters is have you trained the muscle fibers or not.
If you, if you have to choose between superspinal fatigue and calcium IOL fatigue, always choose the
calcium iolator fatigue because superspinal fatigue stops you actually touching the motor units.
You can't, if you can't recruit the motor unit, you can't train those fibers.
And it doesn't matter if you trained fewer fibers with more tension.
That is not a good outcome because long, OK, you might see a little bit more hypertrophy in the
short term, but your long term ceiling is now low because if you can't train the motor, if you can't
train the fibres, you're never going to grow those muscle fibres.
Yeah.
So it would only be worth it in this situation if you weren't getting more super spinal CNS fatigue
or spinal CNS fatigue in the process.
As well yeah so if you if you're happy with the Super spinal fatigue scenario, then yeah, let's try
and manage calcium because why not?
I mean, okay, more mechanical tension is always going to be better, but what we have to remember is
that long term your hypertrophy kind of maximum possible hypertrophy is, is determined by how many
fibres you can activate and train.
Because you can't train a fibre that's not activated, it's physiologically impossible.
You know, I mean, we've been hearing people kind of talking about, you mentioned people have been
talking about lateral force transmission recently.
I find that funny because I'm literally the person who kind of got the fitness industry interested
in lateral force transmission about kind of seven or eight years ago.
But fundamentally you know, that is not a hypertrophy mechanism.
You know hypertrophy is created by the fibre themselves, itself producing it's own mechanical
tension.
Yes, you can stretch a fibre externally without to be activated and not create sarcomeyogenesis, but
the only way to stimulate myofibrillar addition inside a muscle fibre is for it to produce it's own
cross produced and for those cross produced to hit a sufficient level of mechanical tension that
stimulates fibre to grow.
So the Super spinal fatigue is the bigger factor or the CNFTQ in general is a big factor because
it's what determines, you know, how many motor units we can actually recruit.
If what you just speculated on in terms of calcium, calcium ion fatigue potentially being mitigated
a little bit in that context, that would also suggest that there could be a slight reduction in post
workout fatigue as well due to potentially less muscle damage if that were the case.
Well, no, yes and no.
On a fibre level, yes, but on a whole muscle level, no.
Because if you can, if you, if you ask, yeah.
You've got to look at what's happening with super spinal CNS fatigue as well.
Generally speaking, in studies where we've in studies where people have looked at differences in,
for example, rest periods, there's, there's a few studies in rest period duration analysis where
researchers have compared like kind of 30 seconds, you know, one minute, 2 minutes and like 5
minutes in animal models to try and see how that affects post workout fatigue.
So you would kind of expect some differences there.
The the problem is that all these different fatigue mechanisms are moving in different directions.
If you have a large amount of CNS fatigue, then what's going to happen is that your latest sets are
simply not going to recruit the motor unit.
It's at the top end of the motor unit pool and that actually protects you.
That now protects you from getting more post workout CNFT.
So if you do a kind of a very short rest period workout, you actually find that you can start to
suppress post workout CNF particular sorry post workout, particularly because you've got some super
spinal CN fatigue towards the end of that workout.
Obviously animal models don't always take that into account because these electrical stimulation is
kind of becomes messy working while what's going on.
So if you had long rest periods and you could actually maintain your motive recruitment high, you
might find that with sufficiently high risk sufficiently long rest periods and maintaining
recruitment sufficiently high, you actually end up with more post workout kind of fatigue because
you are not protecting the muscle during the workout in the same way.
But equally you've got the calcium iolative fatigue kind of potentially moving in different
directions where you've got some dissipation.
And then again it, it becomes very, very difficult to model.
So I think yeah, potentially if you're able to recover a little bit of calcium ion accumulation and
get rid of a little bit of calcium ion accumulation, sorry or sort of remove a little bit of calcium
ion related team mechanism between sets, you might end up with a little bit less post workout.
But I wouldn't want to definitively say that is happening because of potentially other things that
are moving around in opposite directions and allowing recruitment to be higher.
Because if recruitment is high, you are going to get more damage just because that's how muscle
fibers work.
You have more glycolytic fibers at the top end of the motor unit pool.
Which is my suspicion.
When you look at a lot of circuits kind of like what we started with today, they tend to usually do
three to five sets.
You know, there was other bodybuilders doing circuits like this in the 60s and they're usually doing
a similar format, three sets, four sets.
And I do have a suspicion that those latest sets, they are probably having a bit of a super spinal
CNS protective mechanism on them and that's why they can get away with this high volume without it
maybe causing as much place workout fatigue.
And I mean, one of the obvious strategies, and we mentioned this when we were talking about this
before the podcast, one of the obvious strategies to start mitigating some of this problem is to
just do reps in reserve.
Yes.
I mean, I can see a scenario where people, if people were to use sort of heavy ish loads, heavy or
moderately heavy loads where they could do a couple of reps per set.
So let's say you were doing, I mean, let's say you were doing a 5 RIP Max and you did one or two
reps per set.
You know, I think that could be a really interesting model for using a circuit because you're
staying a long way from failure.
You're avoiding calcium and relative fatigue completely.
You're kind of minimising your supraspinal and spinal CNS fatigues.
I think you could probably make something like that work very, very well.
And when we were talking about it, you mentioned that you've actually got a protocol that you were
using recently or or in the past that works pretty much like that.
Yeah.
And that was actually based off that first plan that I said I wrote after we first talked.
And essentially the the thinking there was if we look at clusters, you know, we've talked a lot
about classes.
We did a whole episode in classes and we've talked about one way of doing classes would be to pick
A5 repetition Max load and then doing singles or double s with that and then taking 3040 seconds off
and repeating.
And essentially what's gonna happen over that.
Let's say you do 10 sets, 10 double s with that weight is you're going to get this slow accumulation
of both metabolite fatigue and also you're going to get some increasing superspinal CNS fatigue over
those, those ten sets.
And for me, if I was to do say you know, 10 double s with a front squat or something like that,
those sort of sets, 789, that's where I'm going to start to notice with those, you know, 40 seconds
off, my breathing is going to stay elevated, my heart rate's going to stay elevated.
Now essentially what we can do is take that cluster idea and merge it with a circuit.
And so if you're doing 5 GB Max loads, you're doing double S and you're just going from one exercise
to the next.
You're taking that 30 seconds just to get to that next exercise, get yourself set up and go.
And it's the same thing.
You just repeat this circuit.
Over time.
There's going to be not so much metabolite related fatigue that's building up, but there's going to
be the Super spinal CNS fatigue which will build up after maybe 4 rounds of it, 5 rounds of whatever
you're ultimately any in that same position as he would do with classes.
Yeah.
But the really elegant thing is that you're blending this with the major advantage that we described
at the beginning for circuits, which is that you've literally, let's say, for example, you let's
pick the death circuit that you mentioned earlier.
So kind of take a take a protocol that somebody's doing, which is already fairly minimalist.
You know, we've done a minimalist episode before on this podcast, but I think we we said it was
going to be some kind of press, incline press or, or kind of overhead press and then a wide grip
pull down probably was my choice as always.
And then maybe kind of a leg press and a stiff leg deadlift or a leg press and leg go and saying
you're doing those four exercises And you could, you could do 2 reps of each exercise and then you
could do it again and do another two reps of each exercise.
And then you could do it one more time and do another two reps of each exercise.
And that would be really, really interesting because you would probably have to leave slightly
longer rest periods than would be normal for a circuit type protocol because you're doing multi
joint for everything.
But you would basically start to make sure that your exercise order effect was almost non existent,
you know, and that's one of the things that people really do, I think struggle with.
And that comes back to your point earlier, which is like people are always asking, can I do like,
you know, exercise?
It might.
So I'm doing 3 workouts a week.
Can I literally just reorder the exercises on each kind of day and do an A, a dash, A-A dash,
whatever, It will work out.
A A1A2A3 type workout where you're basically you're doing exactly the same exercise as on all three
days, but you're moving the order around.
So it doesn't look like exactly the same workout, but it is exactly the same workout except for the
exercise order effect.
And I think the thing that people forget about this is that again, the only thing that exercise
order really manages is superspinal CNST.
So if you get to a point where you're changing, let's say for example you do exercises in exactly
the opposite order, then your first exercise obviously becomes last.
Well, there are going to be some fibres in that exercise when it's done first that are going to be
activated and other fibre and and then not going to be activated when it's done last.
That basically means that those fibres are being trained once a week.
If you do that like that, I mean, what you could do is an A/B, A/B, A/B format with exercises in the
opposite order and that would work because obviously you would then be able to get from, you know,
kind of one work out next.
So if you do want to do exercises in a different order, you have to do it as full body A/B, A/B, A/B
or A1A2.
There to play devil's advocate because I do program this sometimes would be say you're doing full
body three times a week is I might start I don't do this often, but sometimes I start each full body
session with a different exercise.
And I say that day you start with that exercise, you now try to match those repetitions for your
next two sessions.
And then you try to hit a new PB that once a week.
And at the very least we can use that starting, starting with that exercise as using it more for
mode units, recruitment games.
Yeah, sure.
It doesn't change the Physiology.
You're just changing the strategies around it.
Yeah.
So the point I'm making there is that the only thing we're changing really with exercise order is
the degree of mode unit recruitment, which is obviously, as I say, our long term kind of sealing
determinant.
But yeah, you could do the opposite order and as I say, do A, B, A/B, A/B.
That would work.
Again, it's not ABA, it's A1A2A1A2A1A2.
But OK, fine, you know, so so that, but coming back to this circuit format, if you did 2 reps of
each exercise and then did the whole thing again, your exercise order effect would be pretty
minimal.
So you could use circuits to kind of maximize your development across all the muscle groups you're
training without needing to mess around with this.
And now I'm not saying that it's going to be better because I think it requires a lot of management.
And I can see a way of making it work with say, four or five exercises.
I think that but when you start to get up to 10 and you've got like a working gym and other people
are around you, it's going to start to get very, very messy, very messy very quickly.
So that's the the sort of convenience issue that I've flagged right at the start and why I don't
tend to talk about circuits all that often because in a busy gym it's just not really feasible.
Sometimes every now and then I will program them in a busy gym using one station.
And So what I'll do there will be, it won't be that the whole workout will be a circuit, I'll have
maybe an A&B series.
And then I might have this circuit in the middle, which would just be with dumbbells at a bench.
And it might be 4 or five different exercises, usually most of the upper body exercises, one or two
exercises to conclude at the end.
So you can still do some variation of circuits in a busy gym.
You could do it in a squawk cage as well.
And you'll be able to do 3 or 4 different exercises there potentially.
But you must be like unloading weights, maybe need two different bars set up.
My favorite way to program circuits is to alternate.
So I do full body AB and I'll have one of those workouts.
So let's take full body A and it'll be essentially a Red Park style essentially like this 5 by 5,
but I'll turn that into a circuit.
So it'll be these big multi join exercises, usually about five of those 5 to 6 multi join exercises.
And exactly what we've just said, I'll take that five GF Max load, I'll do it as double s and then
just rotate through those 5 or 6.
And then on my other full body day, I'll just do the a single set and I'll have the, you know,
12/15/17 different exercises.
And I won't do that as a circuit.
Or if I do do it as a circuit, then I'll do that all the way down and then all the way back up
again.
OK, what do you want me to say?
Any any feedback on on what you would do differently or are you inspired to do a circuit?
Not really, no.
I mean, yeah, I think at the end of the day, the practicalities of the issue, I think for people who
are working in home gyms, I think it's it's it's something that's very cool to play around with.
And, and I do think that it will be, it will be people who are probably doing kind of that
minimalist type routine.
They've got, you know, they've got they've got a squat rack, they're doing a squat.
You know, they're they're doing maybe a stiff leg deadlift.
They're doing, you know, a pull up and they're maybe doing some kind of press.
The the issue is if they're just working out of one power rack, then they are going to be moving the
bar around quite a lot, which is a miserable experience.
I mean, you're probably better at kind of constructing these kind of sequences than I am.
But if you were doing, say, Anderson front squats, so you were doing front squats from pins, then
you obviously would have the barbell at a height that would be kind of more usable if you then,
yeah.
I mean, if you then had blocks you could stand on, you could probably then do sort of stiff legs
from that same position.
I don't know.
I mean that I'm just.
Yeah, very likely.
I mean, again, if you've got access to two bars, you could easily have a.
Or yeah, or you could have, yeah, you could have it set up on the ground.
And then, yeah, or you could just have the the arms out at knee height and you could be doing a
stiff leg or a rackle from there.
And then you can be doing pull ups inside the cage.
So that's usually fairly easy to navigate if you've got that second bar.
But yeah, certainly a single bar you could play with what you suggested there.
Yeah, becomes difficult.
And at the end of the day, I'm more likely to just stick with straight sets if if the messing
around, changing things up becomes so kind of intense that you're like spending all of your time
moving.
Kind of feeds a purpose, doesn't it?
I mean, you could then do like a, a pairing, a superset sort of antagonist superset type thing,
which maybe it's a conversation for another day, but you could drink a little bit.
Yeah.
One other situation, I think circuits have a lot of value and are underutilized, which is a little
bit different to what we've talked about here.
It's it's a practicality thing.
But I remember being APT in a gym and our sessions were 45 minutes and you know, most PTS probably
work off about 45 minutes, sometimes even as little as half an hour.
And for me, when I would have my clients, you know, we would have to do a nutrition chat at the
start, biofeedback, whatever.
And often in that 45 minute session we'd get towards the end and the last exercise we wouldn't have
time to complete together.
Or there might be one or two exercises and I'd have to leave the client to finish up one or two
exercises by themselves.
And I'd go to my next client.
And I think, and I see this, this sexual motivated my thought.
I was sitting in a gym and I was watching APT do exactly this thing.
And the exercises that PT did with their client, the client performed really well, high sort of
effort.
And the PT had to be moving them through these exercises really quickly.
And you could see this client huffing and puffing us and moving to the next exercise because they
obviously had such a limited amount of time.
I thought as a more intelligent way to do this as APT would be to do a circuit.
Said this before, yeah, yeah, I think you're right.
I think you're right.
I think it's a really interesting idea.
So I think as it, it could even be an industry standard, because if you, if you take your client
through one set of everything and just do that really, really well and you know, good execution cues
and, and kind of encouragement and get them to understand what muscular failure actually is like on
each of those kind of scenarios.
They know what their weights are, they know how many reps they're doing.
And then basically at the end of that you say, OK, now just go and do it yourself one more time.
Well, I can't do.
Math those numbers.
That's yeah.
And I think that's fantastic.
I think that's that is deserving of being an industry standard.
I genuinely do.
I think so.
I don't know why it's not adopted.
I mean, maybe some people are doing it, but I just haven't seen anyone doing it.
I think that's, I think that's absolutely, you know, sort of for, for all the all the kind of fuss,
you know, people make about other things.
I think that is probably, you know, better than anything else I've seen as a, as a, as a
recommendation of how we, how we should be personal training, you know, with clients, because that
is such a value, kind of value for money.
If you like thing to do, I think it's brilliant.
You know, so much better than, you know, kind of either rushing or leaving them to do a couple of
exercises on their own at the end that you haven't got time to work with them on.
I think that's that's very cool.
So where I feel like we've landed at this point is that circuits aren't inherently bad for
hypertrophy.
And I think maybe a lot of people maybe entered this conversation thinking there probably wasn't
really any utility to them, and hopefully that's sort of changed their mind a little bit there.
Now, at the same time, I think where we've landed is there's some interesting things that maybe
could be little bonuses or perks or you know, maybe if you managed in a certain way could have some
specific unique and novel benefits to it.
But there's maybe a little bit of a trade off in some things.
And it's it's hard in some gyms and it may not necessarily replace your standard straight sets or
single set, whatever.
Yeah.
I think there's there's two things that I haven't said that I think would be kind of scenarios where
it would become interesting.
Going back to the scenario where I said if someone's got a garage gym, if you have got stations that
are independent, then I think it becomes very interesting.
So I could have done it with because I had basically a power rack.
I had a dip station.
I had obviously a separate pull up bar.
I want to obviously, but I did because I had it bolted to the wall and I had a separate bar on the
floor.
So I've got a squat rack with a with a Barber inside it.
I've got the kind of deadlift platform on the floor, and then I've got a pull up bar and a dip
station separate.
So I could have done 4 exercises there.
Pull up, dip, deadlift, stiff leg off the floor, off, off, off, probably blocks, and then and then
squat in the rack, front squat in the rack.
And that, that would have been brilliant.
That would have worked really, really well.
I tended not to do that.
I tended to do supersets because that just kind of what felt better for me at the time.
But if you wanted to do that kind of cluster routine where you're doing 2 reps of a Fiber Maxim 4
and you could work around those four, I think that would be really, really interesting just as
something to try and see how it felt and capturing I.
Do that in my home gym for OK yeah, that's exactly how I did.
That's pretty cool.
I think that that would be interestingly usable in the context of a taper for an athlete.
So if you've got a strength athlete that's working around those kind of exercises or something
similar and you've got the ability to set them all up to to function like that independently without
having to move equipment around, then I think as a tapering strategy that could be really cool for
two reasons.
Firstly, because by doing kind of two reps of a fiber Max, you are absolutely getting nowhere near
something that's going to create post workout fatigue.
So from a strength athlete point of view, that's very, very cool.
You're getting your required intensity, get your adaptations and keep your adaptations without
really getting very much post worker.
So you could actually make that work really, really well.
So from a tapering strategy that's very, very cool.
Also, and I think this is under appreciated, if you put yourself in a scenario where you are doing,
you know, 4 separate exercises or five separate exercises in a circuit, say two or three times, say
three times, you're going to get out of your head for 45 minutes to an hour.
And if you're tapering and you've got an important competition coming up, that's not, you know,
that's not to be underestimated.
I think that's pretty, pretty important because people are under a lot of competition related stress
to have a work out where they don't have, I mean, two rips to the five RIP Max, whatever is should
be keeping people well within, you know, the realms of, you know, comfort for want of a better word.
But the constant activity is going to be keeping them from kind of ruminating on the competition
that they're going to do.
So I think that's I think that's potentially quite positive from a, you know, sports psychology
point of view, as well as from a kind of tapering point of view and post workout fatigue management.
So, you know, no, it's not the next best, you know, not the next great thing for everybody to start
doing.
Absolutely not.
But I do think there are some really interesting little applications here and there of this of this
idea.
Yeah, I think people could push it a little bit as well and and merge it with some other strategies
or outlines as well.
Like for example, one thing I haven't mentioned that Silver area guys did quite a bit was they would
do say maybe maybe they do a squat and then they might do another one or two exercises and then they
do the squat again and then another one or two exercises, squat again.
And you could absolutely intersperse your multi join exercises with single sets of some of these,
you know, single join exercises that are less fatiguing.
And so there'd be ways you could you could not do a classic circuit, but merge some of the benefits
into the standard workout.
Well, I think that's definitely something for people to consider in the exercise order kind of
thought process, which is you don't really unless, and we've talked about this before, but I mean,
like, yes, some people at the moment in the science based lifting community are like doing kind of
25 exercises or single joint, single limb, you know, kind of variations.
That's that's, that's fine.
But you know, if you are doing a mix of multi joint and single joint, you don't really want to be
doing all your multi joints together and all your single joints together.
If you find yourself doing like 4 single joint exercises in a row, unless your entire workout is
single joint exercises, then you've probably done something wrong with your exercise order kind of
sequencing.
Much better off is to have, you know, multi joint, couple of single joints, multi joint, couple of
single joints and like kind of pace yourself in that way, you know, and I think that's that's an
important kind of lesson above and beyond just this conversation about circuits, which is kind of
what you're drawing attention to.
I think that's it for the conversation.
Anything else you want to add to finish with?
No, I'm surprised that we managed that long, actually.
I thought circuits to be a fairly sort of sort of short conversation.
But you know, clearly the wisdom of crowds has come through.
So, yeah, that was an episode that was I guess not quite a request because we did ask whether people
wanted to hear about the particular topic.
But yeah, if people have suggestions for other topics that they would like us to cover, then please
let us know and we'll do the same thing again.
We'll put it out to the audience and say, is this something that everybody or at least a number of
people are interested in hearing about?
And we'll be happy to to do that.
I mean, I think that's been a worthwhile exercise.
Yeah, and some of you guys are super creative.
And if you listen to this and you're inspired to work in circuits into your own training in some
unique ways, tag us.
I love it when you guys tag us and show us what you're doing and how you've implemented some of the
stuff we've talked about, because some of it is ways I've never thought about how to implement it.
And I looked at him like, oh, that's a cool idea, maybe I'll do that.
So by all means, if this has inspired any of you, let us know.
Yeah, I mean, it'll make a change for me being tagged in things where people are criticizing me,
calling, calling me everything from a pig to a dog, I mean.
This is what I need some positive conditionings reinforcements, so you're you start enjoying seeing
what you're tagged in and then that's how we can get content in front of you when I send you
something to look at.
So everyone help me out, tag Chris and some some positive content on circuits.
OK?
Thank you everyone for joining us for another episode, and we'll be back next week with a new topic.