Episode: 035 Which advanced methods work? Cluster sets, drop sets, pre-fatigue, and more!
URL: https://open.spotify.com/episode/11GdsdQLZdE6QG3GUNC9WV
Published: 2026-01-19
================================================================================

Thank you for joining us for another episode of Hypertrophy, past and present.
Chris, how are you doing today?
I'm doing very well.
Thank you.
Jake.
How are you?
I'm a well, I just went swimming and it's beautiful here.
It's sunny and it's probably about 10 times warmer than it is where you are.
So it's.
Badly true, yes.
I'm doing very well.
There's been a lot of people talking about these lately, and these are some topics we've talked
about before.
We've done whole episodes on on clusters in the past.
So if you are unfamiliar with what a cluster is, that's obviously an episode where we go in nice and
deep.
But we want to touch on some other training variables or methods or advanced techniques or whatever
you want to call them today that people are talking about and using.
And I wanted to present even some a plan, I guess, where they actually use some of these.
And you guys who follow these episodes so far will know that the Silver area plans don't use a lot
of these techniques.
We've covered a couple in the past.
We've covered, you know, some plans that did use clusters.
We've covered some plans that did use isometrics.
But generally speaking, straight sets was kind of the norm.
It'll just be your standard, you know, your 5 to 12 repetitions kind of standard, 2 minutes off
between sets.
Often even the dress periods weren't really that specific as kind of dress as long as you need and
that was about it.
And then once we get to that sort of light part of the silver era, coming to the golden era, that's
where we start to see some interesting things start to develop.
As far as, you know, isometrics are being used more and super setting in giant setting.
And we've covered some golden plans called golden era plans that used some giant sets in the past.
And we're gonna look at one of those plans today.
Now this is a plan from a guy named Chuck Sipes.
And some of you I'm sure will have heard of Chuck.
And Chuck is an interesting character because he did kind of cover this sort of silver into golden
era period.
So he was active competing in what I was so classed as the silver era.
So he was winning competitions in the the late 50s and then he won Mr. America in 59 and he
continued to compete into the 60s.
And I think he even competed in the early 70s.
So he sort of bridged this whole kind of silver era, golden era period when steroids started to be
used.
And you know, obviously it's hard to know for sure, but he was an advocate for natural bodybuilding
and he did seem to have fairly strong opinions against anabolic use.
And you know, he's a interesting character.
Like he, my understanding is he ended up doing a lot of like like youth work and mentoring after you
finish competing.
And, and he's, he's definitely a a, he got a lot of interesting sort of things about his life and
he's a definitely a bodybuilder.
I've looked into quite a lot in the past and, and found his life quite interesting.
But the plan today I wanna talk about is an earlier plan that he discussed.
Some of his later plans were pretty wild and he was known for some pretty outdoor out there methods.
So he did like a one to 12:50 method some people may have heard of and maybe in the future we'll
talk about it.
But this plan is a little bit more pared back as far as some of the Chuck Sipes plans go, and it's
still very interesting.
So it's a four day split and it's not like a upper lower per SE.
So we've got a a Monday and a Thursday plan which involved chest, back, hands, shoulders and biceps.
And then we've got the other workout which is done twice a week on Tuesday and Friday.
And that involved triceps, quads, calves.
And then he had some trap work in there, he had some AB work in there and he also had a reverse
curl.
So brachiogadialis exercise, which is interesting to do is doing elbow flex on both days.
So it's AI guess non conventional split.
And you know, it's obviously we've moved away from full body at this point.
This would have been probably mid 60s, maybe late 60s.
So at this point anabolics were widely being used and we're starting to see plans and and training
templates shift quite a lot.
So this is what he called a heavy light program.
I'm not sure who termed that that term heavy light.
And there's obviously different variants of heavy light, but the way Chuck did this one was his
first.
So these were super sets.
OK, so almost everything in these plans were super sets.
So it involved doing one exercise and then immediately going and doing another exercise.
And he suggested actually having 2 bars set up so you could immediately go from one to the other.
And the first super set was a behind the neck overhead press.
So obviously we've seen this a lot in in silver area plans.
And he did four sets of two repetitions, so very heavy behind the neck.
And then he would superset that with a barbell front raise and that was done for sets of 10.
His next superset would be a bench and this was for four sets of 1.
So single repetitions here.
And then he would superset that with a straight arm pullover.
So a barbell pullover, which again very popular exercise in in even like early silver era.
And this actually persisted for quite a while and the pullover was done with 12 repetitions, which
sounds like a lot, but they actually used to use like very high repetitions for the pullover.
So this is actually lower reps than what most people were using.
He then went into a a cheating barbell curl for four sets of one, which is pretty wild doing a
single with a barbell curl and he would superset that with sets of 12 with the creature curl.
And then the next superset was a conventional deadlift for twos.
So 4 set to two superset it with essentially what was like a good morning exercise.
And this, the way this was written, it's said to have a broomstick behind your neck.
I guess maybe he used a barbell as well because he does talk about having the barbell set up.
And this was done for 12 repetitions.
So it was like a a front bend with a bar or stick on your, I guess on your shoulders.
Then the next superset was a bent over barbell row for four sets of two.
So again, very heavy barbell rows supersetted with a lat pull down, four sets of 15 going quite
highest repetitions there.
And that concluded our Monday and Thursday workout.
Our next workout we have a superset of flying triceps extensions, 5 sets of two supersetted with
triceps pressed down, five sets of 15, which maybe was just a accessibility issue or you know,
weight issue limitation.
Then we go to a barbell back squat, 4 sets of two superseted with leg extensions, 4 sets of 15 and
then standing calf raised.
Now I don't know how 1 is going to set this up for four sets of two, but he did suggest four sets of
two.
So maybe he had a heavier machine than what I've used in the gym, I don't know.
And then he superseted that with a body weight heel raise, so basically a body weight standing calf
raised.
And that was four sets of 20.
And then concluded just with a barbell shrug, a reverse curl and some AB work, each for 8 reps for
the shrug in the curl and 20 grabs for the ABS.
OK.
So that's interesting.
I mean, I think it's fairly clear that we can see the golden era influence on this, but at the same
time you can see the silver era roots in it.
So when I say the golden era influence, the obviously the number of sets per exercise is you know
quite high.
We've got four sets per exercise which we wouldn't have had in the silver area, probably would have
just had the single sets.
Similarly, obviously it is a an unconventional split and he's doing essentially 4 workouts a week.
So again, those characteristics of golden era characteristics rather than silver or even modern day
characteristics really apart from the Renaissance that we're seeing now of the silver era programs.
But as I said, you can see this kind of silver influence in the sense that we've got a very
interesting exercise selection as a whole.
It still has, but again has elements of of of the golden era and modern era in it.
And we also have, you know, a tendency to use more exercises instead of just throw sets at, you
know, a single exercise.
So, you know, there's that, that exercise variety that we're used to seeing.
I think that and and again some of the exercises do have a very gold, very silver era rather than
golden era feel to them like the behind the neck press, the as you mentioned the straight on
pullover, that kind of thing very much a kind of silver era tendency.
What I like about the excise selection here is that we do have some decent back work and we do have
some decent hamstrings work.
And again, maybe that is sort of a thing that.
Yeah, the goal of the year, maybe pushing a little bit more.
You know, so we've got we've got a decent transverse plane row.
I mean it's not my favorite variation, but it is there and we've got a lat pull down.
So again, we're kind of approaching a decent combination of back work, not a full a complement by
any means, but it's pretty pretty much there.
You know, similarly, we've got some hamstrings work there with the deadlift variations and the good
morning again, not seeing any leg curls, but maybe they just didn't have, you know, a sort of
convenient machine that was widely available at that time.
So ultimately, obviously the main feature of this program though, is this kind of super setting.
So this idea that we've got, and I think they're, I mean, you can quibble terminology here, but I
think they're more or less all agonist super sets.
So if we kind of divide super sets into sort of either, you know, two exercises that are training
more or less the same muscle group or you know, kind of exercises that are not training the same
muscle group.
I mean, obviously in there is most people would do antagonist supersets, but technically it's just
any that aren't the same kind of muscle group.
So we've got like agonist versus non agonist.
Most of these I think are agonist.
So essentially we're kind of, I mean, not perfectly like for example, the press behind the neck is
mostly going to be a middle deltoid exercise with some anterior bolt on the side, a large chunk of
anterior bought on the side.
A front raise is going to be kind of a curricular Peck excise with a large chunk of anterior dealt
bought on the size.
It's like there's there's kind of not a perfect kind of match up in any in any by any means.
And then of course, the really interesting thing about it is that in the context of the Super set,
he's choosing to do 1 exercise mostly compounds, although there is that cheap curl in there which is
absolutely bonkers.
And then he's which you?
Know that's a funny point in and of the stuff because I hear so many people are saying, you know, he
can't possibly do heavy curls.
No one ever did that.
A lot of these silver era guys did that.
You know, Range was doing sets of five barbell curls and man, the load these guys would have been
using is hectic.
Yeah, no, I mean, this is, this is really crazy.
When you see that written down, you look at it and you're like, I'm just getting palpitations
thinking about that.
Yeah, how do you I'm just looking at it.
Yeah.
How did my?
Yeah, so, so, yes, but most of it is kind of a heavy compound and there's a lot, there's a line
tricycle extension.
I probably would have chosen a close grip bench, but you know, ultimately it's it's kind of a heavy
compound.
And then he's got like something else, which is a little.
Bit I suspect he didn't choose a bench because he had chess the day before.
Yeah, Yeah.
No, it's, it's interesting how it how it, how it's put together.
And then there's kind of this often single joint excise or something, you know, just that
fundamentally isn't quite so suited to heavy loading He's then doing with a, a lighter load
combination or moderately light load combination.
So I mean that that is a really interesting type of superset.
And and really the reason for that is because when we look at supersets as a thing, you know, what
is a superset doing?
Ultimately, if you're doing a an agonist superset, you're kind of just carrying on training the
exact same muscle that you are just, you know, training immediately prior to that.
Now supersets kind of get a little bit of a terminology problem with them.
Some people kind of assume that a superset means that you immediately like drop set style, go
straight from one exercise into the next without taking any rest.
Other people sort of say, well, maybe there's like a 32nd or a minute or even, you know, normal rest
periods between the tissue kind of alternating and energy breaks down because some people are
talking about one thing, other people are talking about a different thing.
But ultimately here, what we're saying is we're going, you know, from one exercise into the other
with an unspecified period of time between them, probably relatively short.
But I mean you can tell me whether.
There's an incomplete rest on that.
Incomplete rest is probably the best we can do, isn't it?
Yeah, But the choice of the excise selection and the Rep selection is such that we're not expecting
to have a very meaningful amount of fatigue present from that one or two repetitions done by that,
you know, kind of first exercise in the sequence.
So the point about super sets that we do them today is that we do a whole bunch of repetitions, we
reach muscular failure and then we immediately do a different exercise.
We're actually doing that second exercise with the fatigue mechanisms present from the previous set
here.
He's not really suffering that problem.
And when I say he's not suffering that problem, what I mean is that some of the fatigue mechanisms
that develop over a course of a set to failure are going to be either reducing mechanical tension at
the fibre level or reducing motor unit recruitment such that what we do second after that first set,
after the say, first exercise that we've done is not actually going to be as stimulating as if we'd
just left a decent rest period.
Which is exactly what happens when we look at, you know, short rest periods in strength training.
People compare strength training programmes done with short and long rest periods and, you know,
they realise that the short rest period is not as effective and it's simply because the fatigue
mechanisms are carrying over from one set to the next.
We get exactly the same problem here.
He's not really suffering much of that because his singles and his double S are not going to cause
very much fatigue at all.
So just to clarify that a little bit more, so that single of a cheating barbell girl, so someone
performs a single cheating barbell girl, what fatigue mechanisms are present or that what fatigue is
accumulating in that set that might still affect him in the preacher girl?
So let me let me give a slightly longer answer to that.
So I'm going to start so that people have full context of explaining how we actually reach muscular
failure in any scenario.
So this doesn't matter whether you're doing singles, double S, fives, tens, 15 S, 20s, thirties, it
really doesn't matter.
They're all exactly the same.
In fact, I would argue it's the same whether you're running a marathon or whether you're doing 1
Maxis.
It's absolutely the same every single time.
So essentially as we start performing about to exercise the external constraints that we're working
within are going to require us to produce a certain amount of force in order to be able to move or
more of the object that we're moving.
And that will essentially tell us that we need to produce a certain amount of Motine recruitment and
we will feel an effort perception associated with that level of recruitment commensurate with the
magnitude of that signal, the central mode command.
So if I'm moving a light or moderate load, I'm going to experience at the beginning of the set a
relatively small amount of effort perception because of the sensation of innovation from that motor
equipment signal.
In contrast, if I'm lifting sort of fives, double s, whatever, I'm going to be at a pretty much the
maximum level of motion equipment pretty much instantaneously.
And that's going to give me a very, very, very high level of effort perception pretty much
instantaneously.
So, you know, it doesn't really matter where I start.
I'm going to have different levels of recruitment, but otherwise there's nothing really
fundamentally different between the situations.
As I progress and try and do more work, what's going to happen is various fatigue mechanisms are
going to develop and there's basically four major categories.
I mean, this is a simplification, but it works for most situations.
I'm going to have a peripheral category in a central nervous system category.
In the peripheral category, I'm going to have two major groups.
I'm going to have metabolite fatigue mechanisms and I'm going to have calcium I related fatigue
mechanisms.
In the central nervous system, I'm going to have what we call supraspinal, which is brain based
fatigue mechanisms and I'm going to have spinal, which is obviously spinal based fatigue mechanisms.
As far as each of these 4 mechanisms are concerned, they all do very slightly different things in
the tab light related to fatigue mechanisms, what they're going to do is they're primarily going to
slow down muscle fibre shortening velocity.
That's that's kind of the main thing that they do.
Now ultimately that isn't problematic for producing mechanical tension that stimulates hypertrophy.
It just causes us to move more slowly.
Calcium ion related to fatigue mechanisms primarily just switch off the insides of the fibre and
stop it producing mechanical tension.
So obviously that is a kind of a negative for the stimulus that we're concerned with.
As regards the central nervous system.
Supraspinal and spinal both just reduce the amount of recruitment we've got at the muscular level.
So they're doing the same thing for an output.
They're doing them in different ways.
Spinal is doing it by a desensitization process of the signal going through the spinal cord.
The same signal has been created in the brain.
It just kind of diminishes as it traverses through to the muscle fibers.
Supraspinal is basically caused by us perceiving perceptions of effort from other sources.
So ultimately this is the primary one that works in many sort of superset situations.
If I do a, even if their superset's done with different exercises with totally different parts of
the body, for example, if you, I mean, I often say to people, if you don't believe that this is
happening, just do like lat pull downs and then go and do bench presses or do squats and then go and
do you know, kind of bench presses or something like that and superset them and see how you feel.
Ultimately, we tend to get a very large perception of effort from cardiovascular sensations in those
large muscle mass exercises and that then carries over and we start experiencing that perception of
effort, which then choosing to our ability to experience perception of effort from the sensation of
innovation.
So we reach failure earlier than we would do if we didn't have that negative sensation present.
So that's the four categories.
So every time we're going through exercise, we're, we're using, we're, we're experiencing some of
these fatigue mechanisms as we progress.
Now if you kind of go all the way down to answer your question, if you go all the way down towards
ones, twos, threes, fours, fives, what's happening is you're already pretty much at the very top
level of motor unit equipment that you can achieve and you're pretty much close to your maximum
level of effort that you can tolerate.
So ultimately this is Marcora's psychobiological model of T telling us that we reach failure when we
hit our maximum tolerable perception of effort.
And ultimately we are pretty much at that limit on our very first repetition in a, we are, we are in
a case of a single already there, but in the case of a double or a triple or, or or A5, we're, we're
very close to it.
We're just not quite there.
What happens of course is that any of the fatigue mechanisms can now develop in that single.
What you're going to find is that you do get a little bit of super spinal.
There are sensations externally, but they're very tiny spinal.
Again, you can have some of that, but very, very tiny calcium.
Relative fatigue is pretty much going to be nonexistent because it does, it requires a lot more time
to actually accrue.
You need to keep putting calcium into the fiber for that to happen, but metabolites will actually
build up pretty quickly.
The paradox or not the paradox, but the surprise that most people are faced with when they start
analysing how do we reach failure in a single or a double is actually that we're already pretty much
at our maximum tolerable perception of effort when we arrive at the beginning of the repetition.
And then you just add a little bit of metabolite related to fatigue.
You can't now increase recruitment very far to compensate for that and bang, you hit failure.
So when people say to me.
So you said such a small buffer at top that anything.
Anything will push you.
So the reality is when people say to me what is it that causes us to reach failure in A1 Max
deadlift and I turn and look at them and I say it's metabolite related fatigue and they just look at
me as if I've got 2 heads because they can't understand how metabolites can create that situation.
It's because you're pretty much already there.
You've got such a small man there is I am seeing a lot of people argue against that online and and
no one's offering a better alternative that I'm saying saying, well, this is this is what causes
when it isn't.
That always the case.
Ioffer an explanation based on Physiology.
People screech about it and then I ask them what their alternative is and they just carry on
screeching.
There's no there is no, there is no alternative to what I'm explaining here.
Nobody has an alternative.
So this is really interesting though, because if you look at that chaining barbell curl, you look at
any most of these exercises that are done for ones or twos as you just outlined there like how much
spinal CNS fatigue is going to be present?
Basically nothing.
You know, you do your single, you move to next exercise, almost all that should have dissipated.
Yeah, super spinal CNS fatigue, how much is going to be present?
You do a single repetition of a barbell curl?
Probably nothing, yeah.
And just to be clear on that, just to be clear on that, a lot of people still think that heavy
compound exercises cause with, with, with, yeah, essentially a small number of repetitions of a
compound exercise with a heavy load cause central nervous system fatigue.
Though that idea still does perpetuate, and it's absolutely not true.
CNS fatigue is created by the experience of negative sensations in the body that are not a sensation
of innovation.
And in a heavy compound lift, you've pretty much only got the sensation of innovation.
That's pretty much the only thing that exists.
You don't have burning sensations from metabolites, you don't have cardiovascular feelings because
you've got so few repetitions there's nothing else going on, so it can't create.
CSDCSD is created by perceptions from other sources.
So here with this superset doing a single going to the set of 10 or 12 or whatever, is there
anything that's being left on the table?
Like is that a bad idea?
To me, this doesn't seem like a bad idea.
It's, it's not that it's a bad idea, it's just that it isn't doing very much.
So ultimately it's.
Not giving you anything extra, sure.
Yeah, I mean like honestly, honestly, it's not.
I would prefer to see something like a set of four or five done with a slightly lighter load around
the sort of 567 Rep Max territory and use say fewer sets in total.
So I don't have a problem with alternating and I'm not a fan of the superset idea.
Obviously with a superset idea, doing that approach, you would need to leave proper rests between
sets because 5 or 6 reps with that kind of load, you would be in kind of cardiovascular territory.
You would need to then leave some rest.
So you'll be back to basically just doing a couple of sets.
Ultimately, we're back to what we were saying last week, which is essentially just do a couple of
exercises for each muscle group and do one or two sets of each.
So, but here what we're saying is that no, you're not losing very much by doing this, apart from the
fact that you are going to be setting up two exercises and one or two stimulating reps for the first
exercise isn't really much to write home about.
Yeah, depending on what your purpose is there, If you're doing it because you're actually wanting
your singles and your deadlift to go up, then OK, absolutely.
Would.
Because then the concern is that that super set, that second exercise is then going to affect the
next set of the deadlift.
Exactly.
Yeah, so.
Yeah.
But it's.
Interesting.
It would just be to do one or two sets of each and to separate them out.
And we're back to a silver era program, aren't we?
This is true.
Yeah, this is true.
I mean, you could do because I've, I've programmed something very similar to this before, calling it
a heavy light where that first set was low repetitions.
And then I call an excise pairing instead of a super set because I would give a bit of rest period,
but a shorter rest period than normal and then go into a moderate Rep exercise.
But I would just do one set of that.
I would prefer not because then if you're coming back to that low Rep set like you've just said,
you've kind of lost the benefit.
Yeah.
You cooked to that point.
But it's interesting here, if you were doing a super set, arguably anything, would you say sort of
like that for repetitions and up, that's where it's it's really going to start to negatively affect
you not having that dress period and potentially below for repetitions, maybe less so.
Yeah, I think that's probably fair.
I mean, again, there's exercise selection issues with that.
Yeah, I think there's there's going to be variances there.
But probably speaking, I think that's probably right.
Ultimately, I think some people will look at this program and go, oh, well, no, we can get a
potentiation effect from doing that heavy excise prior to the light load exercise or the moderate
load exercise.
I'm like, no, that's not how potentiation works.
People used to think that that's how it worked.
It's not how it works physiologically.
It's just not how it works.
So you can get potentiation from anything as long as there's Max recruitment, you get potentiation
from that.
So you can get potentiation for an isometric, get potentiation from a high velocity excise, you get
potentiation from a moderate load exercise you've just taken to failure.
You don't need to do a heavy load exercise and you know, kind of set up a program in this way to
take advantage of potentiation.
So the whole kind of heavy light idea, you know, based around that idea of potentiation isn't really
something special.
It's not.
It's not a not too useful technique, I think.
I want to keep talking about super sets and variants of super sets.
Is there anything else worth mentioning about this plan before we move on?
No, I think I'm good.
I mean, ultimately I would be just repeating things that I've said before about excise selection and
trends in that, you know, you've taken us through in terms of silver and golden era programs.
So I don't think there's anything particularly exciting to say about that.
You would probably say that the volume given that it's a two way split over 4 days, it probably is
landing where you would predict picked as recoverable volume, especially given we've got some low
repetition sets for some of it.
My concern really is just how much you're getting like what, what are you getting out of that fourth
set, you know, but is it going to really stop you in terms of the program working overall?
No, I just don't know that you're getting sort of the return on investment that one might think
they're getting.
But All in all, like I didn't, I look at this and I would certainly wouldn't think this is a plan
that's not going to work.
It's just a plan that I would probably tweak.
Oh, absolutely.
I think that's, you know, many of these crossover plans from, I mean, to be fair, I mean the Silver
era plans we would tweak, but.
Usually excise selection though, but it's.
Mostly just we look at the, we look at the excise selection, we go, well we've got all these
machines available to us, so we would use those instead.
Because this excise selection is fairly good, there's fewer tweaks we would need to make.
It's not.
Horrible.
Yeah, it's not horrible at all.
And really, again, if you, if you cut those sets in half, it's, it's not a bad plan at that level.
I'm like, you know what?
I'm it's permissible.
I'm happy with that.
Yeah.
But then to be honest, you know, I think the the madness has happened in the last kind of 30 or 40
years.
You know, anything prior to that point isn't horrible.
The madness has kind of been possessed in in the last 30-40 years.
Yeah.
So continuing on with supersets, what else to is there to say?
So you've mentioned obviously we're talking about agonist supersets in the context of this plan and
some people do antagonist supersets.
Do you want to touch on that?
Yeah.
So basically it all comes back to what you're carrying over with you from the previous exercise that
you've just done.
So if you put two exercises together and you call them a superset, and obviously, as you say, we've
got incomplete rest between the two, whether it's, you know, a lot or a little, it's, you know,
variable.
But ultimately you just look and you say, if I've got a super set that's using the same muscle group
and I'm going to have all of my fatigue mechanisms carried over, you know, obviously some dissipate
faster than others, but I'm just going to carry pretty much all of them over.
If I have a different muscle pairing, so whether that's antagonist or something completely
different, then I'm just going to carry the central nervous system mechanisms over mainly primarily
just the Super Spinal 1.
So ultimately supraspinal is going to be a really big factor if I have a large amount of
cardiovascular sensation or if I have a large amount of burning sensations in the muscles.
So essentially from using a moderate or a lighter load, then I'm going to probably have that problem
to a greater degree.
And the more sets that I do, the bigger the problem is going to get.
So ultimately I would say that the major issue that plagues supersets probably is independent of
whether it's agonist or antagonist because it's the reluction motive equipment happening from the
sensations that is the major issue.
The reality is that most of the local fatigue mechanisms that you carry over from one set to the
next with a short rest, with a short rest period is actually a tower like related, which is fairly
innocuous.
So I actually don't think it matters too much whether we're talking about a muscle that's exactly
the same or slightly different.
We're just carrying superspinal fatigue over, really.
Yeah.
So really the only way that you could use supersets, whether it's agonist or antagonist, and not
lose too much would be to really minimize superspinal sinus fatigue by using lower repetitions and
stuff that's not going to have as much of A cardiovascular demand to it.
Totally.
So, yeah, I mean, if you're using the heavier load under the spectrum, you just give yourself 30
seconds or whatever, then I think you're kind of starting to get away from those problems.
But ultimately what you're doing is you're just moving in the direction of what a standard kind of
workout should look like.
Yeah, exactly.
I mean, I guess you could argue if you're going to do, you know, maybe you do a set of two, you
know, overhead press and then you do a set of two pull ups and then you take a risk period after
that.
OK, you've saved a bit of time.
You haven't lost much.
I think that's probably fair.
I think that's probably fair.
And I think for people who really are not like we talked about in one of our episodes a week or so
ago, where we're saying, you know, how to make a program more interesting for a client who's
expecting variety and, and constantly moving around doing things.
This will be one of those kind of scenarios where you could see that working.
So if the client is in, in, in, in sort of that state where they want to be constantly doing
something and a session, they don't want to be wasting any time.
This is an interesting way of just kind of giving them more things to do and not losing too much in
the process.
Yeah, yeah, OK.
I can't think of a way to make supersets give us anything beneficial.
I can only think of ways to mitigate some of the downsides to them.
So yeah.
Yeah, you literally just allow you to do a little bit more in the constraints of a 30 minute or.
45 period of time period.
Of time, but you are giving up something to make that happen.
It's just, can we minimize how much you're giving up at the same time as, you know, kind of getting
through more stuff more quickly?
Yes, yes.
Is an efficiency tool, is not a tool to enhance stimulus totally.
So there's obviously additional variants of supersets.
So then there's like Tri sets, giant sets and obviously these all work in very similar ways.
Is anything worth mentioning specifically about any of these variants?
No.
I mean essentially as you say, it is doing exactly the same thing.
You're just tacking an extra kind of element on.
So for example, following that suggestion you made where maybe somebody's doing something like a
heavy press for a couple of reps and a heavy pull for a couple of reps, you could have them do a
heavy hinge or some sort of leg press for a couple of reps and they could just do a circuit of those
3.
And you know, you could, again, more or less make that work if you're really trying to get a lot of
value out to a very short session.
Not anywhere near my favorite way of programming, but you know, that would be kind of the limitation
on how you can make something like that work.
I remember when we first started speaking a few years ago and I was talking to you about giant sets.
I don't know if you remember this and I, I think maybe I showed you a giant set of workout or, or
something like that and, you know, had sort of eight different exercises there for, you know, doubts
and chess and whatever.
And I was like, well, hang on.
If we if we just gave some rest periods between both sets, if you actually just rested in a minute,
90 seconds and then you did the giant set just with these rest periods.
And then if you don't do any more sets of it, if you just did that once of the giant it's.
A Silver era program.
Yeah, well, I was like, wouldn't this be a good plan?
And you're like, you've just turned the giant sets into straight sets, so God damn it, I have to.
But yeah, exactly like you said then.
It's just what we've talked about the last few weeks.
But you know, what I do like about giant sets is it does push people into more exercise variety
because generally you see a plan based on super sets and you know, it's usually going to be one or
two exercises per muscle and they often will do four or five sets.
It just tends to be the way people ride it out.
But do you see someone giving someone a giant set and they do use 456 different exercises?
So at the very least, that tends to be one thing they're doing a little bit better.
Yeah, that that kind of observation that we made last week does seem to have kind of gone gone the
rounds where the observation that if you've got, you know, two, you're going to do 2 sets for a
muscle group, why not just do them for two with two different exercises rather than just multiplying
the sets?
I mean, when you put it in such obvious terms, it makes so much more sense because you kind of at
the very least you get the same benefit, probably getting some more benefits if you get, you know, a
bit of different coverage.
So anyway, yeah, So yes, triceps giant sets.
Exactly the same concept as a superset, really.
So almost all, not all, but almost all advanced methods, whether if you want to call them, tend to
rely on, I guess modulating or adjusting your rest periods in some way like that tends to be the
main variable that they're kind of working on.
And that certainly is the case.
He was super sets and giant sets, just minimizing that rest period and lumping exercises together.
And then there's other variations of that, which I guess could come under a superset category.
So you could have things like pre exhaust or post exhaust.
Yeah.
So I mean, pre exhaustion is something that was very popular probably about 10 years ago I think.
And it basically is again, it's like an agonist superset.
But the idea behind it is interesting because it's fundamentally incorrect.
And it's fundamentally incorrect because the the people who are obviously popularizing it and
talking about it and proposing the ways in which they thought it worked hadn't read the motor
learning literature so didn't know that what they were proposing was fundamentally impossible.
So ultimately with the way pre exhaustion works is that you do like a single joint exercise prior to
a multi joint exercise with a view to changing what happens in the multi joint exercise.
And that is predicated on the idea that if fatigue is present in a single muscle group, say for
example you do a knee extension and then do like a squat or something like that or a leg press.
The idea is that by pre fatiguing the quadriceps, something changes in the squat or the leg press
that you're going to do.
Secondly, and that just isn't actually correct, because what happens is with coordination patterns
is that the brain just uses its best motor program for the movement you're doing that it has derived
in the past and it tries to implement that and it implements it based on its knowledge of how
activations in the past have produced movement.
So let me just terrify what I mean by that.
So essentially when you move, when you move an object, your brain has a map of how the activations
of the muscles that it is creating are producing the movement that you want.
When you become fatigued, what happens is that the forces associated with each of those activations
drop.
The brain doesn't understand that.
All it understands is that you're fatigued.
So what happens is you increase motor unit recruitment and it continues to send that recruitment in
the same pattern than it did previously.
So you end up essentially just trying to do the movement exactly as you did before, just at a higher
level.
Now the output that you do will change because say for example, you're really fatigued in a
particular location.
The brain won't recognise that it needs to send more activation to that location.
It'll just send more activation in the same proportions that it's always done when it does that
movement.
So you'll just hit failure in exactly the same state that you would have done previously, except
your movement pattern will look pretty horrible compared to what it would have done if you hadn't
done that pre fatigue process.
So ultimately people did pre exhaustion because they thought it meant that you could get a greater
stimulus in a specific muscle and you could talk to different people and they'll give you different
opinion.
Some people say we're pre fatiguing the quads so we get more glute workout or we're pre fatiguing
the quads so we get more quad workout.
You just you asked them, you get two different answers and you weren't and they weren't actually,
you know, present you with a model.
The problem is that they're both wrong.
The brain doesn't do that.
It just tries to do exactly the same thing as it was doing previously.
So ultimately from a negatives point of view, from a downsides point of view, negatives is a another
advanced technique.
From a from a downsides point of view, you're getting the same downside that you would do with any
super cell, which is that you've got fatigue mechanisms present and you know some of them are going
to be problematic, especially the superspinal CST.
So you are going to see a reduction in the level of stimulus that you get from the second part of
the pre exhaustion.
But fundamentally, the very thing that pre exhaustion people are trying to persuade you as happening
cannot happen.
It doesn't happen.
The brain doesn't create new motor programs on the fly for the fact that you're fatigued.
You can literally see that happening.
If you get a really high level sprinter who's got amazing mechanics and you pre fatigue them and get
them to run, they'll look like they're running through Jelly and it's like, OK, this is one of the
best sprinters in the world.
Why can't they correct their movement paths to run perfectly when they're in a fatigue state?
It's we can't do that.
It's not a possibility.
So I'm going to play devil's advocate here.
And I, I mean, you know, I do this, I, I actually program pre exhaust occasionally, not often, but
it fits some people.
And the way I do that is if I have a client who, let's say, struggles to to develop their glutes and
they have done everything right and followed a good program for a long time, and they're just not
able to properly or adequately develop the glutes.
Sometimes I might use a glute exercise before the main glute work and do high repetitions away from
failure high velocity in more of like a say a shortened position exercise.
To try to get a bit of a glute pump to then go into whatever exercise we're trying to do to
essentially acutely change the leverages and then hopefully over time change the movement pattern.
Does that make any sense at all?
So I mean, yeah, I mean changing leverages has the potential to give the brain new information,
incorrect information, but new information nevertheless.
The issue is that, I mean, ultimately what we know is that the brain will learn from whatever
information that you give it.
So if you're if you are able to increase leverages to the degree that the brain finds that that is
now more effective than what it was doing previously, then you would then teach the brain to use
that as a new motor pattern, even in an unfatigue state.
So I think it really depends on the magnitude of how much leverage has changed.
If leverage does change a lot then and the brain finds that then it is incentivised to use the glute
and it previously wasn't incentivised to use the glute, then yeah, I think you would change how the
the brain uses that muscle in the future in, in similar kind of hip extension situations.
I mean, I'm not, yeah, physiologically there's, there's, there's, there's a rationale there.
It's just I think you would need a pretty decent change in in leverage for that app.
Yeah, I started doing it because anecdotally had had some clients who had found basically doing
something along those lines had been the only thing that they had felt that actually developed the
gluten.
You know, I remember we talked about it.
I think you're the one anyway who came up with this sort of hypothesis that maybe this could be
possible.
And so far, obviously it's always hard to know when people are following what I'd say is a well
structured workout program anyway to know what The thing is that's working.
But I do feel like I've seen good results doing it this way.
So it is, I mean, essentially it's similar to what you've talked about creatine.
Isn't it like creatine ultimately and from a strength perspective?
But the problem with creatine is that it will be indiscriminate in how it applies the increase in
muscle size, so you won't see any leverage changes relative to other leverage changes necessarily.
Yes, you can't use it for this purpose exactly, but hopefully this is a way we could potentially
specifically target one part to change leverages maybe?
Yeah.
No, no, it's definitely possible.
More than that, I can't really say.
What are the rest pools?
I guess that comes under a similar.
So this is now, we're now moving into territory where we're not changing exercises, aren't we?
So basically we've got a whole bunch now of techniques like drop sets and rest pools where we're not
changing the kind of excise selection, we're just taking a short rest period or no rest period and
then doing something that allows us to continue doing the set.
Rest pause is probably worth just leaving for a moment because it kind of bridges us into clusters,
which is where we're aiming for this conversation.
So if I just cover drop sets first, drop sets basically in the classic sense, we do a set of say
moderate loads, we reach failure, we then reduce the weight and carry on.
Now the, the interesting thing here is that we really are going to carry over pretty much all
fatigue mechanisms straight through to the second, that kind of drop or third drop that we're doing
that we've already built up.
We've got no break at all.
So spinal CNS fatigue is really unpleasant about the way it works in the sense that essentially if
you leave even a few seconds, it drops precipitously.
It's really, really nice work been done in CNST in the last kind of decade or so showing that
because for a long time, I mean, most people don't realise this, but for a long time, most of the
CNS fatigue work was done in the endurance kind of area of exercise science.
And they because they show that you know, like 80% of the fatigue that these guys experience is CNS.
And they were doing a lot of experiments and they were kind of trying to bridge the gap between
understanding why there seemed to be so much or so many indirect indications that there was
boatloads of CNFT being present during the exercise itself.
But when they hoiked the athlete off the treadmill or the bike or whatever it is that they were
doing the test on and stuck them on the machine to test voluntary activation, it wasn't as bad as
they were expecting.
They were just seeing, you know, 1020% reductions in motor recruitment.
They were like, why is there such a big difference between what we think is happening in the actual
activity that they're doing?
Why do we think they've got, you know, just insane amounts of CNFT present in that situation?
And then when we test them like 30 seconds, a minute later, it's all gone.
And part of that reason is as as technology got better and they started to actually integrate
voluntary activation testing into the ergometers, ergometers that they were using for the actual,
you know, kind of cycling activity, They were able to test voluntary activation on pretty much
instantaneously at the point when the athletes stopped the exercise task.
And that reduction in the amount of time between the excise test finishing and or the failure point
occurring and the test being done revealed that a lot of CNS fatigue is being lost in that very
short rest period.
So ultimately the sort of rest periods that we take between strength training sets are pretty much
more than sufficient for getting rid of most of the spinal CST that we're going to experience and a
chunk of the supraspinal as well.
And when you start to take things down to almost no risk period, as we're seeing with rest pause,
sorry, not rest pause drop sets, as we see the almost no risk period that we get with drop sets,
you're carrying a lot of CNST and you're going to have MOTI nut crew levels really, really
suppressed.
I just want to emphasize this point because we have this, we had this idea running around.
You mentioned it to me and I think I've seen it on social media as well, this idea that if you do
more volume, extra sets, you can achieve higher levels of recruitment.
It's exactly the opposite.
We get lower levels of recruitment.
The more fatigue we experience, the more of the, especially the CNS fatigue mechanisms that we're
experienced, we're going to get lower levels of recruitment.
That's exactly what happens in a drop set.
You do the first set, you hit muscular failure.
A big chunk of the reason why you hit muscular failure is because of supraspinal and spinal CNS
fatigues.
You are literally going into that next section of the drop set carrying all of that and then
immediately, obviously then experiencing a much smaller stimulus and consequently fewer stimulating
reps than you would do if you'd actually just left even 30 seconds.
You would see a big difference there.
So for me, drop sets are the pretty much the worst of the worst.
They they are, they're pretty much no value at all really when it comes to, obviously people argue
with the terminology, no value at all.
Yeah, you're going to get a tiny little bit extra stimulus, but the cost that you pay in terms of
post work, appetite especially is just huge for what you get.
So the way that I program drop sets is, is similar to the giant set thing where it's like you're
going to look at me in Blackwell that's no longer a drop set, but in like we're talking about with
super sets.
If you're using lower repetition sets, obviously we are reducing the amount of the more, I guess we
could say damaging types of fatigue that are accumulating.
And if So, what I would do is get people to do say a set of four or five repetitions and then I
normally get, I normally will get them to keep one revenue reserve, but I honestly don't mind even
if someone takes that set of four or five to failure and then I get them to reduce the load by 20%,
rest 30 seconds and try.
To match.
It's.
Not a drop.
Set but if you choose to load so so I guess it's like a a drop set dress sports it's.
A it's a combination of the two.
Yeah, it's yeah.
Drop set, really.
You know, it's OK, fine.
Yes, you have reduced the load.
So, you know, the interesting thing is I mean like drop sets, you can also, I mean, again,
terminology is horrible in exercise science, especially where exercise science meets the fitness
community.
So some people talk about mechanical drop sets and some people talk about four straps.
And yet the terminology is actually a four strap is actually closer to a drop set than a mechanical
drop sets.
But ultimately the the terminologies are are are are messy, but essentially a forced Rep is
literally identical to a drop set.
It's just that you're.
Using a human being is taking the load off, yeah.
To to reduce the weight for you rather than you physically having to remove pins and change things
around on the machines.
So a drop set and a forced Rep are identical.
I guess unless they were just helping with the concentric and then you were doing the eccentric,
because I think that's a way that some people would do it.
Yeah, I mean, obviously it's eccentrics aren't really doing anything anyway, but you know.
I guess you're getting a nice extra dose of damage by doing it that way.
Yeah.
So, but then a mechanical drop set is is kind of changing the exercise a little bit.
So we're kind of going back to this idea of supersets and pre exhaustion and that kind of thing
depending on how much the exercise has changed, if it's really keeping the exercise very similar.
I mean, we talked about, you know, previously the idea that you could go from a, a front squat to a
back squat.
I mean, essentially it's a mechanical drop set.
You're making the excise easier therefore, but fundamentally, again from the muscles point of view,
you're basically doing the same thing as a as a drop set.
Yeah, so a mechanical drop set.
So what if you were to do so much of this rests on not doing moderate or or high repetitions.
Hey, like once you start doing any of these methods with high repetitions, it's just all out the
window.
I just, I don't know how you could possibly salvage it, but say you were doing, you know, low to mod
repetitions with a a reverse curl and then you do you hit failure and then you immediately do
supinated grip.
This is not the best example because obviously you're still going to get a decent chunk of directory
out of yalis just based on the resistance profile.
But if you are able to do an XA mechanical drop set where you are able to bias a different region of
that muscle group.
Well, this is the same idea as doing a set to failure and then doing partials on the back end of it.
So what you often see people doing is they'll do a particular exercise and then when they can't get
any further, they'll then add on a whole bunch of of partials in a range of motion that they can
use.
And again, that that is literally a mechanical drop set.
You're you're making the exercise easier.
Modifying it easier, yeah.
So you've, you've, you hit exactly the same, sorry, except in that case you have a very clear
example.
And then the example that you just gave, when you change the exercise, you actually start to shift
the activation from one part of the muscle or one part of the muscle group to start a different
place.
So you're actually kind of sort of doing a superset really, because you're training a very slight
muscle group or at least part of the side.
I think my one makes more sense because in in the example you gave with the partial, you're just all
that's happening.
If you were to picture that you're just getting fewer and fewer mode units recruited as you continue
on with those partials.
But in my example, you go from the reverse grip to supinated and you actually get this uptick in
biases tracking recruitment.
So there's potentially depending on obviously how you can, if you're doing this with accommodating
resistance, however you make this work, but potentially using an exercise that is easier but biases
a different region would potentially have a slight benefit there compared to just pumping the same
thing in in this partial range of motion, no?
Yeah.
I mean, so, so basically you, you've got the same problem that you would have without antagonist
supersets, but you don't quite have all of the problems that you would have with an agonist
superset.
Yeah, you know, marginal difference really.
You might have some a bit a bit less spinal level super sorry, sorry, spinal level CNST because that
does tend to be quite muscle specific.
So you know, but you're still going to have all the supraspinal CNHD present.
So it's not going to not going to get rid of.
It, but again, if you're doing a set of, you know, sort of four or five, then it's going to be less
than I guess it would have.
Otherwise, what's fascinating is when people, when people kind of propose this idea of like, you
know, oh, we've got this idea and we're going to do this strength training exercise.
And then when we get to the end, when we reach muscular failure of that set, we're then going to add
some partial range of motion exercises on the end of it.
Now they, they propose that as if it's like in isolation and nobody's ever thought of doing that
before.
And we don't have any clue what's going to happen.
I'm like, literally it is the same thing as doing 2 exercises or one exercise with two with, with a
rest period that's shorter than you would normally do.
What, what's different just because you've called it something?
This is what people do.
They call something a particular name.
Then they say, oh, well, this is new.
And I'm like it's exactly the same as just using short rest periods.
I mean, alternatively, actually, I think it's important to note that it is in fact a different
thing.
So like, you know, what I get annoyed about is when I see someone say, oh, you know, we're doing
this, this whatever car phrase to failure.
And then we're going to do partials and small partials and small partials or whatever.
It's like, well, hang on.
No, what you're doing is literally you're just changing the exercise.
Like you've gone from doing a full run calf phrase to doing a partial run calf phrase and all you're
doing is you've, you've modified the task, right?
Like I feel like people fail to understand that actually, no, anytime you're changing the exercise,
it's not the same exercise.
It might look 90% the same, but it's not the same exercise.
Just give it a different name, understand it's something different, and that's why you're able to
continue doing it, because you're doing a different exercise.
Yeah, so let me clarify this.
So a a perfect mechanical drop set, if you're training a muscle that you're interested in, like the
quads, a perfect mechanical drop set without changing the X size would be something like a front
squat to a back squat.
Because I'm not changing what the quads are doing in those two scenarios, I'm changing the position
of the barbell to me.
An alternative would be if I go from a hip thrust to a group pitch, so I'm doing the hip 1st and
then I switch to do glute bridges which are easier and again I'm not changing what the groups are
doing, I'm just fundamentally making the exercise easier.
Lateral raises.
I can start with a lateral raise all the way out to the side with my arms tuck out at 90° or I can
bend my elbow and make it easier.
Again.
Mechanical drops.
Say I'm not changing what the delts are doing.
When you start to change what the exercise is actually doing, then it kind of starts to give you 2
exercises and you're now not doing the same exercise as a drop set, true drop set, or even, you
know, a variation thereof.
You're now doing something that is getting closer to being an antagonist supers.
Sorry, not an antagonist superset.
A non agonist.
A non agonist superset.
Oh yeah, true, because he used a different Yeah.
Actually.
So for example, a great example of that would be if I do a standing calf raise essentially.
That's not a good example.
Actually, that's that's the worst example I could have picked because I can't, because I can't, I
can't actually do that.
So let me think of a better example.
Where would my yeah, the example that you came up with earlier.
So if we're doing preacher curls and we do preacher curls through the range of motion, the entire
range of motion, then I should find that I fail in the lower half of the range of motion where the
bices brach you have best average.
If I now move the dumbbell close to me and I do partials at the top of the range of motion until
again I reach failure and that's going to be brachy radialis exercise separate from the previous
prices brachy exercise.
So essentially I've done what I've done there is I've changed the exercise has his focus by changing
the range of motion that I'm working in.
So that's now closer to it's kind of halfway between an agonist and a non agonist superset really.
And that same definition applies when you're thinking about agonist supersets because often, and
this is what I was saying, I guess with the plan we started with at the start is a lot of those
exercises like you Rally pointed out.
Aren't really pure agonist, they're kind of a blend.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Because most people will think agonists simply mean the same muscle group and that's, that's
probably the definition I would work off most commonly.
That's how I think most programming would would see it.
But yeah, rightfully if we're being technical here, then that's not really going to be an agonist
superset if it is different regions with that muscle.
Yeah.
So mechanical drop sets, Anything else worth saying about them?
I, I'm trying to think of if I ever programmed them and I, I can't remember the last time.
I, I think maybe maybe eight years ago is probably the last time I programmed them.
So I don't have a an example to give you to try to try to push your buttons at all.
The the conversation we were having before we jumped on the podcast day is actually the interesting
one because you said to me, what happens if I do a bilateral exercise and then do a unilateral
exercise, which is identical immediately afterwards?
Is that what do we call that?
Is that the same thing as a drop set?
Is it a super set?
What is it?
What's going on?
And it's actually really interesting because it's nothing like anything else that we've talked about
today, because what fundamentally happens when we reduce the total amount of muscle mass that's
working in an exercise is that MOTI agreement immediately jumps upwards.
So this is the whole, this is ultimately and interestingly, every time I do an Instagram questions
and somebody who follows me asks me to basically write their PhD plan for them, they say, they say
what would be a perfect PhD to use.
Oh, and by the way, I have no equipment because my, my, the university I'm doing my PhD isn't, you
know, kind of set up to provide very much, you know, kind of, you know, apparatus to help me do the
PhD.
And I'm like, you know, just basically do an entire PhD based on applying Marcora's psychobiological
model of fatigue to strength training.
And the first experiment that you can do is literally do a bilateral exercise set to failure.
So maybe a 10 Rep Max or something, reach muscular failure immediately, put one implement down and
continue doing single arm or single leg, you know, kind of exercise with exactly the same load that
you were just doing.
Obviously only works if you're able to, you know, kind of use separate loads for each limb.
So imagine you don't biceps curls, you just do 2 dumbbell biceps curls, one each arm and then you
put one number down, you try and carry on.
You should get one or two more repetitions that that shows you that we're hitting maximum tolerable
perception of effort at a lower level of motive recruitment when we're using two limbs compared to
when we're using one limb, which is essentially the bilateral force deficit observation now.
If we do a strength training set and we do say whether it's a PEC fly or a bicycle or whatever, and
then we immediately do another unilaterally immediately afterwards, you are going to get a higher
level of recruitment instantaneously and that's going to allow you to do extra repetitions.
That's not a drop set because you're not reducing the weight using the same load as you were doing
before.
So what is it?
It's a new thing.
It's a fundamentally new thing, yeah.
So physiological reasons, you know, it's, it's really interesting.
So mechanistically, like you said, it's unlike the other examples we've given from a, because a lot
of these examples or these methods, they, they lose their efficacy because of what's happening from
a fatigue standpoint.
Like they're, they're increasing fatigue and they're not increasing similar.
So they they just don't provide an additional benefit from that standpoint.
Yeah.
I was just thinking about an example to try and help people understand the difference there.
So these, you're absolutely right.
So what we've just talked through is all of these advanced techniques have been explained.
How they work has been explained by how fatigue mechanisms are occurring and being carried over from
one moment in time to the next.
This is different because imagine it's like you were doing a set of knee extensions and you got and
your log book, you did 10 repetitions last time and you were trying to get 11.
And as you were getting 11, somebody jumped out from behind the door with a sign that says you get
$1,000,000.
If you do another repetition and hit 12 and your motivation jumps up through the roof and you fight
for your life to get that extra repetition.
That's what's happening essentially, not identically, but the motivation increases, increases your
capacity to tolerate effort, which increases your ability to hit higher levels of recruitment.
Ultimately what's happening here is that you're having some of your effort perception reduced by the
other limbs stopping working.
And now you have access to that level of recruitment and that level of perception that you didn't
previously have access to.
So it's more or less the same thing as a motivational increase.
It's just not exactly the same because motivation fundamentally increases the tolerable obsession of
effort.
This is just reducing the amount of effort that you're currently perceiving and allowing you to then
use that for another purpose.
So they're different from fundamentally different from these previous explanations that we've been
working through because it's not about fatigue mechanisms now, it's about the way recruitment work.
Yeah, yeah.
So, you know, when we're trying to decide what, what do you, what do you even call that?
I was like, is this like some kind of like drop set?
And we sort of said, hey, you know, it's kind of like a physiological drop set where it's making it
easier internally rather than reducing the load externally.
But in terms of what it's doing, it's, it's not working by just increasing fatigue, right?
Like obviously there's going to be an increase in fatigue as you continue with the set, no doubt,
but most of these other mechanisms are working by simply trying to enhance the effect of fatigue.
How do we build more fatigue by having less rest periods or whatever?
So with this, it's, I guess is kind of similar to a cluster, which we'll talk about in a moment in
terms of what it's doing.
Well, no, I mean, even then, is it really, because I mean, it, it, it, it's like this moment in
time, you get to the end of your bilateral set and then then there's a switch that gets thrown and
you now have access to more mote units that you didn't have access to a moment ago.
My, my question really is, if I do this and I do say, for example, let's say the example we were
talking about earlier was a PEC fly.
So I'm doing my PEC fly and I do say, you know, 10 repetitions and I hit maximum sort of tolerable
position of effort and I stop and then I immediately can do an extra 2 repetitions if I do them on
this side.
What does that look like from a stimulus point of view?
If I compare it with literally just an entire set of 12 with that R?
Yeah, yeah, I don't think it's different.
Yeah, I think it's basically the same.
So, so then it's like, OK, well, what happens then?
And your follow up question to me when we were talking about this earlier is what happens then if I
alternate between between single arms at the end of my 10 Rep Max.
So I do my 10 Rep Max PEC deck and then I alternate one right one, left one right one.
Now, because I'm now turning this into a cluster format, I'm leaving a space for each arm to do the
work while the other one rests.
I'm now probably going to get more like you said to me, you're getting 4 or maybe even 5.
So that cluster effect, I've combined cluster.
This is like, you know, combining things to the degree.
It is, and that's what I meant a moment ago.
And I said it's kind of like a cluster.
It was no jumping ahead, yeah.
Jumping ahead, yeah.
So now what we've done is we've added essentially this motivational boost and it's not motivation
like you said, because we have an increased maximum tollable possession of effort, but we've taken
effort away essentially we've.
Freed up some effort perception to use elsewhere.
Yeah.
So, so the best way to think about this would almost be motivational boost cluster like we've added
this cluster with this motivational boost.
At the end of two things, these two things simultaneously, and this is so important because in order
to understand what's happening here, you have to understand all of the stuff that we've previously
discussed about how the tea is working and how this is now separate and different and doing
something actually quite interesting.
Yeah, yeah.
So.
I was laying in bed thinking about it.
I was.
Going to lie in bed thinking about.
This is how I force just thinking about how I can apply Physiology and and I was like, I don't think
this is useless because usually these like fatigue for things are just useless, right?
And I'm like, no, no, I don't think it is.
And I was like, it's it's too late at night to try to work out what's happening.
Just going to talk to you about it.
Today, if you compare, if you compare 1 set of single arm PEC decks, so say 12 repetitions and you
compare that and then, and then obviously you don't have to rest and then you do the other arm.
So I do my 12 repetitions with my right arm, I do my 12 repetitions with my left arm.
And that's then the workout for, for, for the, for that muscle group.
If you now say, OK, well instead of doing that, I'm going to do 10 bilateral reps and then I'm going
to add on an additional say 4 repetitions poster.
I think that you might find you're getting that done more quickly than you would do if you're doing
2 arms separately and you might get in And I think that your 14 repetitions probably is going to
come out around about 13 ish.
Sorry, hang on a minute, where are we?
If we're counting stimulating reps, then obviously the set to failure of 10 reps gives you 5
stimulating reps.
This is probably getting you 6 1/2 at a guess, maybe 7.
What I'm saying is that the cluster effect is real.
It's going to adding on.
So, so this is really interesting.
So this is what we're saying here is that rather than doing single arm and single leg stuff all the
time, it might be really cool because a lot of people when they, when you say to them, single arm or
single limb stuff allows you to hit high levels of recruitment.
Therefore, it's a fundamentally better way of training if you want to maximize muscle growth over
time.
And then they turn around to you and go, well, I'm already doing 12 exercises for my whole body.
I'm supposed to do 24.
That's insane.
Now maybe this is a way to to start.
I mean, people have got to try this and let us know what they think is their experience.
I find so far my experimentation has found that a number of machines work well where you've got the
police so you don't have to change the load obviously, so you can do it.
That's the key.
Thing yeah, so knee extension is not going to work unless you've got one of those weird ones that
has two pads one for.
Each.
Yeah, those ones actually.
I might try that next week, yeah, but I've found it works well for this.
He just announces this because he just happens to have a gym that has everything in it.
Yeah, Lambs, I'm over here with like, you know, one piece of kit for each muscle.
Group.
OK, cool.
So no, but this is actually.
So if you're listening to this and you're interested in experimenting, please tell us how you find
this and whether it does feel like you're getting essentially, yeah, you're doing a little bit more
than you would do if you're doing just a standard bilateral set.
So it is, you know, kind of more than that, but it's probably not the same as doing 2 unilateral
sets.
If you were to do a say, OK, let's say you did a bilateral set compared to not as well as compared
to a unilateral set, that unilateral set, you're not getting more stimulus in the fibers that are
active.
You're simply.
You're.
Just activating more fibers, correct.
But clusters are going to give you a different effect.
That's why it's interesting.
No, it's not why it's interesting.
It's why the combination is interesting, because not only are you accessing more fibres, but you're
actually doing a little bit more stimulus as well.
Yeah, yeah.
So this is different like if someone kind of say, well, I'll just do, I'll just unilateral.
No, no, this is actually, this is definitely getting more stimulus.
Yeah.
Well, I guess we should talk about clusters.
Yeah, I mean rest pause and clusters I mean.
So rest pause is essentially drop sets, but with rest and not necessarily needing to drop the weight
because you are in fact taking risks.
I, I like rest pause.
I find it fun.
It's one of the things that I, I think I told you a while back that for a couple of month period,
not last year.
Oh yeah.
It was like, no, we're already in 26.
So it's now like 18 months ago, 18 months ago, I was spending a couple of months in a city and very,
very busy city, very big busy city and the centre of town or centre of the town.
Gyms were incredibly packed every time I went.
And if you literally sort of stopped exercising on the machine, somebody would have to work in with
you.
It was, it was, it was like there were queues for the machines and there were people like, you know,
can we, can we work in with you?
And it was like, so I I started using a little bit of rest pause because it it meant that I could
kind of get on the machine, do my thing and then disappear without.
You're lucky.
You're lucky no one spotted you filming you put in TikTok.
Here's Chris busy doing dress pause.
God, you'd never hear the end of it.
I'm not going to comment on that because I might get in trouble.
So yeah, the the thing was I started doing this and I actually enjoy it.
I just noticed that I get horrible amounts of muscle soreness every time I do it and it doesn't
really seem to have a positive effect on my numbers.
So, but anyway, that's my personal experience.
I'm not, you know, kind of I like it.
It just, I don't feel it's for me as it were.
But basically, essentially the rest is giving you the ability to, you know, dissipate some of that
CNFT, which is fantastic.
So it is fundamentally a lot better and it is moving towards clusters which are essentially stopping
before because rest pause really involves reaching failure and then leaving a rest and then doing a
couple more reps and then leaving a rest and then doing a couple more reps.
So that first set is usually there's more reps I think that's and then you bundle.
Two, yeah, rest pause is that.
I mean, traditionally, I think it was around about 810 reps and then 2030 seconds and then maybe two
or three reps you would get and then another 2020 seconds, then you get another one.
Or I think clusters is cool because you don't, you start introducing recipes before you get anywhere
near muscular failure.
So before the fatigue mechanisms start accumulating, you can start throwing in these little rests.
And ultimately that means that really if you look at the progression of fatigue mechanisms over a
set metabolites come first, then spinal CNSP, then superspinal and then calcium.
So with rest pause, you've kind of mostly kind of got, you've got all of that bad stuff and then you
start taking the rest.
What's cool about clusters?
And I think there are actually some people have now modified rest pause to have, you know, rests
earlier, which is moving in the cluster direction.
So which is why I like to group these two together.
So clusters, ultimately the idea is you already start taking rest before you start hitting these
issues.
So in, in reality, arguably the physiological drop set that we were describing a minute ago is kind
of halfway between a response and A and a cluster.
This is you kind of got to failure with your bilateral, but it's not failure as far as the
unilateral is concerned.
So it's, it's kind of it's moving towards the response kind of territory.
So I'm interested in trying this.
I mean, literally you, you sort of dropped this on me today and said, this is cool, let's talk about
it.
So we're talking about it the I'm interested to go to the gym probably tomorrow or Wednesday and see
how it feels from my perspective and see whether it feels like a cluster or whether it feels like a
rest pause in terms of how I feel afterwards.
Because I know that if I do clusters, I don't get sore.
If I do rest pause I get sore.
Oh, I suspect you might get sore doing this for the first time.
Well, OK, yeah.
But I get sore every time I do rest pause.
So if I get sore the first time, it's just because I'm probably, I don't do a lot of unilateral
stuff because I tend to just go in the gym, hit my thing and go, you know, kind of go home again.
Whereas, you know, that's why, yeah, the first time I do some unilateral, I will get sore, but
that's just because I'm using different muscle fibers.
But if that then goes away and it becomes just kind of the same as it was before, then I would say
that's probably close to it.
From my perceived experience, it would be close to a cluster.
So clusters, obviously there's ways different ways of doing those.
And I think the popular way of doing classes now has heavily shifted towards I guess what used to be
called strength clusters or there's a whole lot of different definitions and names of them.
But obviously we've done a whole episode of classes and we very strongly advocated for using a
heavier load.
If you're using classes using something like that five Rev Max.
So all of those repetitions you're doing in that class of set are maximum stimulating.
The I, you know, I have seen people doing things like, you know, classes with, you know, little
classes of like 4 repetitions and using like a 12 Rep Max load or or whatever and trying to get 16
reps out with 12 reps and those kind of cluster methods.
That's not exactly what we're talking about here.
And I mean.
Yeah, I mean, people just need to think things through when they start.
I mean, like, to be honest, a lot of research has fallen into this trap.
They do like clusters with 10's and 12 Rep maxes, you know, and they're they're doing, they're
splitting that up into threes and twos and fours and what have them.
And I'm like looking at it and going guys, not thinking what's happening.
You're just kind of making stuff up and hoping for the best.
It's like understand that recruitment, you know, is only going to get to high levels when you're
within a certain proximity to failure.
So you have to think about your cluster in those terms.
So either you need to do a whole bunch of reps before you start cluster refining what you're doing,
or you have to do heavy loads.
I think cluster with heavy loads fantastic.
I think it's a really, really nice, elegant way of training.
It's just not the kind of you You do want a way to track progressive overload if you're going to do
it over a long period of time.
Yeah.
And you know, obviously we've talked about that in in our our podcast previously.
It's a method I really liked.
I use it a lot.
I use it often.
I kind of use it as like part of my warm up.
So often I'll pick an exercise I want to do the cluster on, I'll pick that 5G Max.
So for example, like a latch arrays, I love doing with latch arrays, I might need one warm up set,
go to my 5G Max.
And then the thing with the classes and we've talked about this is you don't, even if you're not
using that class set as tracking a previous of overload, which you know is very difficult to do
anyway, then you don't even need to be that specific with rest period.
So for me, I'll just sort of, you know, I'll do a wrap, I'll whatever, I won't even tie myself, I'll
do another one.
I'll do 10 of them in total.
And that's like a nice way for me just to kind of like ease into the workout.
I enjoy it.
I put the, the exercise that I'm trying to work on, you know, whatever at the start of that workout.
And then I'll perform that exercise again later in the week for a five year Max and just kind of
check, use that, I guess to, to tether it and see, you know, what load I'm using.
But you don't need to be so specific with our 20 seconds between repetitions or 30 or 40 or
whatever.
That doesn't particularly matter that much as long as you're dissipating fatigue, does it?
Yeah.
So I mean, as long as the load is heavy, then you can pretty much take as much rest as you like.
I mean, there's some stories of some of the older, you know, kind of characters in the Silver era
and even before where they would do a a single repetition and wander off, do something else and then
come back later and do another repetition.
And that's the whole point with heavy loading.
You can do that.
And as you say, as long as you're allowing the fatigue to dissipate, just carry on ripping those.
But that's the cool thing.
When you hit recruitment high levels the Rep on it's own is good enough.
Well, it's like, you know, we covered that Alan Stephen plan ages ago and that was what was that in
the 4048 or whenever that was and he was saying, hey, pick a five year Max, do 25 reps with it.
I didn't get hey, you don't.
Yeah, that's actually.
Doesn't matter.
Well, it in fact, it's better if you just kind of really break it up and just give yourself space
because then you're not going to be carrying any.
Yeah, you could.
You could get a little bit more calcium ion accumulation if you're pushing those reps a little bit
higher at the start.
But the limitation that I hear from people with classes is really just a time issue.
You know, there's I, I saw someone at TikTok post yesterday that apparently they did a A5 hour class
of workout.
I think it was 5 hours, something like that.
I'm not sure how someone manages like what does it even entail to do a 5 hour class of workout and
see how that's even possible.
But nonetheless, that's what they did.
And I mean, I look at that and I think, you know, it doesn't need to be that time consuming.
Like yes, classes, they may take slightly longer than if you're just doing, you know, one or two
straight sets, but they don't need to take that much longer.
You know, if you're doing 10 clusters, you're doing 10 singles.
You probably, if you're using a five year Max, you don't need more than 30 to 40 seconds between
those singles.
So, you know, we're talking what's that 6 minutes or something to do that 7 minutes to do that,
those 10 repetitions, if you were to do 2 straight sets, you're not getting much change out of 6
minutes anyway.
So, OK, it might take you 10% longer, but that's really at most.
Yeah.
I mean, I guess when you kind of start adding that up over the course of a whole worker, I mean,
maybe it becomes interesting.
But yeah, I mean, ultimately when you're talking about clusters, I think the first thing we have to
do is specify are we are we using these clusters as a way that is analogous to reps in reserve?
Because when we work with athletes, we do clusters because one of the things it does is allows us to
do, you know, four or five repetitions, which we would get with a set to failure of a heavy load.
But it allows us to do those four or five repetitions without hitting failure.
So it essentially becomes a way of doing the same total stimulus without hitting failure and
therefore without, you know, kind of necessarily creating the same fatigue mechanisms.
So there's kind of reasons why we might do certain things.
And I think that is probably the reason why I would like to use clusters with athletes is not
because of the time element.
It's more because it's just a method of leaving reps in reserve.
Well, I think that again is potentially then useful in a bodybuilding situation where again, you
don't necessarily want to be hitting failure every single time you do a set.
And so you can get your 5 stimulating reps and you don't need to hit failure.
Yeah.
So I think again, it's like, why are we doing this?
What's the purpose?
What's what's, what's, what's the, the, what does it unlock for us in terms of the workout?
Does it mean we can do additional total stimulus and and achieve less post workout fatigue?
Because that is definitely, you know, a possibility.
You know, maybe let's, I don't know if you had any other methods you want to talk about, but if not,
maybe we finish a conversation by just going further down that a little bit more.
Because I actually think that's a really interesting way to think about the take a method, let's say
clusters, and you can actually apply this in and program it quite differently depending on what it
is you're wanting to get out of it.
And all those may be viable.
So you've just given the example there with athletes and you know, you would actually stop those
classes.
You're not necessarily taking the class set to the point that they get into failure at the last
cluster repetition.
You would actually be stopping it early.
So you might say, OK, we're going to stop at 10.
You might still have a few reps in reserve when you get to those 10, but that's the way that we've
actually, you know, managed fatigue, managed damage, etcetera.
So that's a really interesting way to like a function of using that method.
Another way that I would use clusters beyond simply just trying to accumulate as much stimulus as
possible.
Like you know, we talked about the Alan Stephen plan, he's doing 25, you know, cluster singles.
OK, you've got 25 ish maximi stimulating repetitions doing it that way.
Obviously someone like that I guess is looking at it not he obviously wasn't thinking this, but if I
was to program it this way, I'd be thinking how do I get as much stimulus as possible in a way
that's not going to negatively impact my next workout?
So that would be another function, I guess is in terms of literally maximising possible stimulus in
that workout.
And then I also use it for people who, you know, maybe there's like A at the end of a workout or
even at the start of a workout, if I'm using like a multi joint exercise and that multi joint
exercise is really cardiovascularly demanding.
So say a squat, OK, And I'm like, OK, I know if I give this person a squat, they're using really
heavy loads and they do, you know, whatever 10 red backs with that squat or whatever that is going
to ruin the next few exercises or we need to wait 10 minutes.
I might get them to do 5 cluster singles or 10 cluster singles, usually five with, you know, that
five Rep Max and it's not going to ruin them cardiovascular wise, superspinal CNS fatigue.
So I'm using it not because it's necessarily helping get more stimulus or it's giving me anything
extra.
It's actually just taking away that negative impact on future exercises.
So there's there's quite a lot of different ways you know you can put at the end, the start wherever
you want to work at depending on what their goal is.
Is there anything else you can think of in terms of using a cluster for a different function?
No, I think you've summarised that pretty well actually.
I think there's yeah.
I mean it's you know, time saving, it's essentially fatigue reducing not just and then, yeah, not
just during the workout, but also post workout.
So the, the, the reason I would use clusters with athletes as I say is primarily the post workout T
reduction.
But you're absolutely right.
You can also do it to limit cardiovascular sensations in the workout as well.
So, yeah, I mean, The thing is, as people have noticed, I think when they've started to compare
clusters with all of these other advanced techniques, is that clusters are going in the opposite
direction.
As a as an advanced take in clusters, you're in the opposite direction from all the others clusters,
you're putting rest in all these others, you're taking rest out and that's it.
I mean, you can literally just analyse it like that and that's basically what's going on.
Which I guess ultimately is why people are complaining about the the time part of it, because if
you're, if you're not taking rest out, it's not really going to shorten it, is it?
Well, again, it shortens the recovery if you kind of use it in the right way.
So as you were pointing out, you can kind of get, if you kind of structure it really intelligently,
you can kind of accumulate more stimulating reps by apportioning them more.
I mean, ultimately if you look at like world records for the maximum number of pull ups done in 24
hours, which means say insane like that, people don't go in and do Max reps straight away.
They can pace themselves and they try and you know kind of and that's the same thing with clusters.
If you have a whole batch of work, if you want to get done, you can get it done more efficiently
with clusters if you space those clusters out because you don't have to worry about the rest periods
afterwards because it's not you're not in a fatigue debt that you would be if you just kind of done
sets to failure.
So yeah, on the one hand, yeah, clusters is putting rest in and it is slowing you down, but you
don't then have the recovery problems if you structure it properly.
So I think you can kind of structure in a way that is advantageous even then.
So honestly it's literally for me it's if you've got the wherewithal to monitor progressive
overload, which clusters kind of get in the way of doing.
But if you've got the wherewithal to measure progressive overload separately because you're doing
like we talked about in the past, alternating clusters with non cluster workouts, whatever you might
be doing, then clusters are actually really, really valuable.
I think they're like on their own, they are way better than everything else we've talked about in
terms of advanced techniques.
Yeah, yeah.
I was just thinking about anything else to say about classes.
One thing, you know, we did touch on this previously in the other episode, but obviously.
I'm glad you're here.
I'm remembering this stuff because I have absolutely no memory.
Of no idea what we talked about yeah, I.
Literally you could have told, you could have said to me, no, we we haven't done an episode on
clusters before.
I'm like alright, OK, we need to cover that then I'll.
Maybe I'll just start, I'll just start gaslighting and saying you remember what you talked about
this one, Chris.
I'll just I'll start making it up.
I want no memory of this too.
But we have talked about using an internal focus of intent with clusters because you're not limited.
Normally you'd be limited by obviously progressive overload and, and you know that sort of target
changing things over time and intent changing over time.
But with the clusters, that's not the limitation.
So you can use it in in some ways as like a motor unit recruitment, I guess exercise or, or, or
method tool even instead of obviously you're still going to be getting that, that high amount of
stimulus, but you can actually be using it more for that purpose.
Not so much you just accumulate as much stimulus as you can, but actually to enhance motor unit
recruitment.
So in that case, you'd be wanting to use it at the start of the workout.
You could use it with even, you know, unilateral exercises.
So again, there's, there's different purposes or different ways you could program it.
You know, you can use at the end of a workout when maybe fatigue has been accumulating and you don't
want, you know, more fatigue accumulating in if you're gonna finish with a couple of sets of an
exercise.
So, you know, something that I get, I guess why I'm, I'm hammering on about this is I get a lot of
questions from people being like, do I use this at the start of workout or at the end of the
workout?
Should I use unilateral exercise at the start of the end or should I use, you know, classes at the
start of the end?
And there's not a rather wrong answer.
Like I'd always say, like, what's your purpose?
Like think about why you're doing it.
And you know, I often will use all these these, you know, whatever methods I use, I'll use them in
totally different ways depending on what the function is of that method in that program for that
person does not like don't don't limit yourself to just using one of these methods in one way.
You're nothing out of that just smiling at me.
Well.
I'm like, you know, just yeah, I don't know.
I mean, I think, I think ultimately this, this, this, the thing that is most interesting about what
we talked about today is this idea that you've had for this physiological drop set this, this idea
that you can do a bilateral set and then tack on a couple of reps alternating limbs, you know, one
Rep, one them, one Rep the other them.
And ultimately, as you said, it doesn't work on every single exercise because the equipment
limitations, but will work on a whole load of exercises.
Interestingly, the, the lat pull down that I'm working with here does actually have independent
arms.
I've, I've almost never had that in a gym that I've been working in at least in the last five years.
So I'm now going to go and see if I can do that, although I'm already maxing it out, so I'm not sure
how much good I'll be able to extract from it unilaterally.
But yeah, so this idea of physiological drops, I mean, when I look at the absolute rubbish that
people kind of run around, you know, promoting and then often naming themselves, you know, after the
thing that they've created, which is, you know, 9 times out of 10, absolute nonsense.
You could, you could have named this after yourself quite easily, I think.
And, you know, promoted a training method that would have, you know, run around the world a couple
of times.
But there it is.
It's out there now.
And people can, you know, kind of pick it up and use it.
And hopefully they'll call it physiological drop set instead of anything else.
Well, I look forward to hearing what people's feedback is on it.
Yeah, no, that is, that is definitely cool.
I'm really looking forward to see how people experience it.
So what I'm interested in is how does it feel in terms of does it feel closer to a rest pause in the
sense that you're getting a lot of, you know, kind of metabolite build up and you're getting a lot
of kind of that local fatigue experience that then translates into a post workout soreness?
Or does it feel more like a cluster in the sense that you feel like you've just kind of got more
work done and then you're moving on to the next thing?
Or is it somewhere in between?
I mean, that's, yeah.
I'm gonna, I'm interested to know what your feedback is, because what I find with it is that those
first one or two repetitions after you've hit failure with the bilateral, it's like, Oh my God, this
feels like an actual drop set.
This feels like, I wouldn't say it's good like it, you know, the palm pain, discomfort, and then you
have fatigue dissipating after those first one or two and then you're like, oh, oh, I, I could just
keep going now.
And then you get, you know, four or five repetitions out so that that later part feels like a
cluster.
That first one or two repetitions feels like a a rest pause or a drop set or something.
Weirdness.
So yeah, no, really interested to hear people's feedback.
I'm going to try it and see what it feels like.
Yeah.
No, I think this is this is new territory.
Interesting times.
OK, I look forward to hearing, like I said, tagging so I can know how you go with it.
Thank you guys for listening as always, and I do hope you'll join us again next week for another
episode.