Episode: 039 How to instantly increase your strength (through motivational techniques)
URL: https://open.spotify.com/episode/0kkFcTjBGXFeI0qhhU3TjO
Published: 2026-02-16
================================================================================

Welcome back.
Thank you for joining us for another episode.
And in today's episode, we're going to discuss how you can actually make yourself stronger
immediately.
So we're going to talk all about motivation and the effects that has in the lift.
Now before we get there, I have an exciting program to talk about.
I'm actually really pumped to talk about this.
So for you guys who joined us last week, I covered Clancy Ross's favorite workout routine from 1952.
Now, ironically, the next day, I actually found this workout, which was Clancy Ross's 1949 such 1950
workout.
And looking at it, I thought this looks really familiar.
And then I contrasted it to the 1952 favorite workout we discussed the day prior and realized it's
actually almost identical.
But there's a few tweaks he's made and it was really interesting to see what integrations he'd made
over a few years to fine tune his full body plan.
So I'm, I'm going to invite you to visualize this with me today as I try to discuss with you the
changes we see in these few years in Clancy's workout routine.
OK, we're good.
Ready, Chris, You're ready.
Yes, I'm ready.
Go for it.
So with our older, our earlier routine from 1949/1950, Clancy was starting off with squats.
Now he did do some lighter sets and then he worked into one hard set and then one back off set.
So we did four sets in total.
Now in our newer routine from 1952, we did keep the squat, but we reduced it down to two to three
sets.
So he dropped off one to two sets there, but the exercise stayed the same.
In the earlier routine, he was using leg presses, 2 sets of 20.
Now you guys who listened last week will know that he swapped the leg press for leg extensions.
Again, same sets, same repetitions, but different exercise.
And we'll we'll talk about why maybe some of these changes were made at the end.
So I'll just run through it.
Now.
The next exercise was the calf exercise.
So he did use a leg press, calf press or a toe press previously.
Now he would did four sets and he worked up to 100 repetitions.
If you need more repetitions, you need a fewer sets.
So you either did 4 by 30 or 1 by 100, which you guys, you listened to to our episode a few weeks
ago where we talked about higher repetitions.
We'll understand why that single set probably didn't do a whole lot.
And in the newer routine, he actually swapped his toe press exercise for a seated calf raise.
In the older routine, he did a flat barbell bench with a wider grip and he kept that exercise the
same in the newer routine.
And then the next exercise he did was an incline barbell press, which he actually swapped out later
on and he used a barbell pullover instead.
Now he also had push ups in the first routine which he dropped out entirely in the next one.
Then for shoulders, he had upright row, which he kept.
He had lateral raises which he kept, but he also had behind the the neck barbell press which he
dropped out entirely.
He didn't even swap it for anything.
Then for arms we have a barbell curl which he kept and A1 arm bent over dumbbell row, not row a curl
which he dropped out and he didn't have any direct triceps work.
So he he essentially, I guess he dropped out the additional biceps exercise and he swapped out for a
flat barbell triceps extension in the newer plan.
Now as far as back is concerned, he had behind the neck chins or pull ups in the first plan and in
the later plan he swapped that for wide grip lat pull down.
And then we had a bit of I guess what I would kind of call fluff.
So in the first plan we had 100 sit ups, 50 side bends and then fifty leg raisers.
Now, I find this interesting because what we do see in this trend going from the early silver era to
the latest silver era is a lot of these type of exercises end up getting dropped out.
And he did drop all of these.
And the only sort of variation of these that he kept in in the later plan was the reverse crunch for
two sets.
So all your hundred Rep sit ups, the side bends, etcetera were gone.
And that's it.
So fairly similar, but a few interesting modifications.
What do you think of that?
So I would say that there's some really interesting trends here that fit with what we would predict
if people were paying attention to what their routines were doing and what the various elements of
that routine would do.
So just picking up the last thing that you mentioned, which is really, really screamingly obvious,
all the high Rep stuff has gone.
So within a couple of years of doing, you know, hundreds of reps of sit up side bones, leg raisers
and even no calf raise stuff with super high reps, that's disappeared.
Now, as you pointed out, we've covered this in detail before, but very, very briefly.
If people are using a load that is lighter than sort of around 30% to 1 Max and obviously hundreds
of reps are going to fall into that category, then what will happen is that there won't be any
vascular occlusion.
So if there's no vascular occlusion, there can't be any metabolite accumulation.
Then you can't use a metabolite related T mechanism to create local muscular fatigue.
And that is going to mean that when you reach muscular failure, you're going to have predominantly
calcium I related T mechanisms which reduce tension and that means you're not going to get a
hypertrophy stimulus.
So it's really cool to see that they've noticed that those things just don't do anything.
Now, obviously there are still people running around today thinking they do do things, but that's,
you know, not obviously our problem and it's not their problem either.
So when I say their problem, I mean silver era bodybuilders.
So, so that's, that's the first thing.
So high Rep stuff doesn't, you know, kind of make the cut, It disappears.
Secondly, we've got a reduction in volumes, so that 19491950 workout has started to drift up towards
higher numbers of squat sets.
There's quite a few sets of cough razors in there.
And I would say in general, there's a few supplemental exercises like the behind the neck press that
are adding to like delt volume that's probably starting to get toppy.
So again, second thing I noticed is just muscle group volume has dropped a little bit there.
And so it's cool to see that again is starting to reflect the kind of classic three sets, three
times a week type models that we see a lot happening in the silver era that are justified by
physiological observations.
So first things will be Rep range stuff has gone, the high Rep range stuff has gone.
Second thing will be the volume has dropped per muscle group.
And I would say the third thing is that we're seeing some better excise selection choices in the
most part.
There's one example that you've already pointed out.
It's probably going the opposite direction, but I would say moving from, you know, squats plus leg
presses down to squats plus knee extensions is a really big step in the right direction.
So again, you know, things like squats and leg presses don't work the right firm.
And just to just to kind of make a point on this because I'm seeing this idea coming back.
If you go back like 10-15 years, you'll see that the standard explanation for why the rec firm is
not operating in a squat or a leg press is because it's not changing length.
And I'm seeing people starting to repeat that again as they're going back and reading all the stuff
and they're repeating it because without understanding.
We have got studies showing that the rect fem drops out even if you're doing an isometric
contraction of combined hip extension and knee extension.
So you're sitting in a squat type position, like a wall sit, and you're producing both hip extension
torque and knee extension torque, the rect fem drops out.
It switches off in that scenario that there's no length change of any muscle in that scenario.
So anybody who says that the right firm stops working in a leg press or a squat because it's not
changing length has not done the reading.
They're just repeating what they've heard or they've seen in a, you know, kind of a manual or, you
know, kind of introductory textbook.
They haven't actually gone through the literature and said, why do we think this?
Why do we think the rectum switches off in those situations is because of studies that have measured
isometric hip extension and the extension contractions showing the rectum and the hamstrings switch
off in those scenarios.
And it's not because it's the length change that matters.
It's because of the antagonist torque being produced at one joint while The Agonist torque is being
produced joint.
So really cool to see them understanding that bioticular muscles switch off in multi joint
activities when they're required to produce antagonist Antagonist talks simultaneously, so that's a
cool change to see there.
I mean, on that point actually, so you've mentioned this reduction in in muscle group volume and I
think that's an interesting point because as we can see most exercises, he didn't reduce the volume.
What he did is he actually dropped out additional exercises when he was exceeding usually 2
exercises per muscle.
Now one thing that's sticking out to me here is the behind the neck press.
He didn't have that with his shoulder work and most of the time in his workout he's he's grouped the
exercises part by the muscle where he had the behind the neck pressed was after his barbell curl
exercises and his dumbbell curl.
So I wonder if he was using that partially for his triceps.
And that seems to actually been replaced by the triceps extension in the new workout.
So again, you'll point with the two it's.
A bioarticular muscle problem.
Exactly.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
No, that makes a lot of sense.
Yeah.
I mean, I think those really are are the main things.
It's it's the understanding that, you know, multi joint exercises just aren't working those muscles
very effectively if at all.
Because really that is that is probably the instance of exercise selection moving in a positive
direction.
That is, that it's most obvious.
Yeah.
So the one example that probably didn't make as much sense would be the calf exercise.
But again, if we're looking at the fact that he was doing the toe press with 100 repetitions, he was
presumably just so limited by load problem.
Yeah, and it probably wasn't really doing anything anyway.
So ugly.
He's chosen a worse exercise, but it's probably doing a little bit more.
Like at least he's getting some Soleus growth I would imagine because he was just, I'm assuming, too
limited in that first exercise.
Yeah, yeah, who knows, But yeah, most likely to be practical reasons rather than, you know, kind of
observing a, a, a physiological trend underpinning what was happening.
OK.
I thought this was a really interesting experiment to assess.
That's very cool.
These two will.
Get shift people changing their in the context of a scenario where there's nothing else confusing
the gains.
I mean, that's the issue that we face today.
People are like, Oh well I did this and you know this didn't work for me and I did this and it did
work for me and I'm like, yeah, but what else were you doing by what else?
I think everybody knows what I mean when I said well.
OK.
So moving on, you're going to tell us how we can all get stronger immediately.
Well, the context for this, a context for this is because, and we've been talking obviously about
how people get excited about various different topics at different times.
And so we try and provide information that's helpful for them at the times when they're interested
in it, because obviously that's the best motivation for learning something is to see something that
you're interested in.
So at the moment, people are very interested in how we actually reach muscular failure.
So at the moment, in that, in that context, people are saying, well, is it because I'm building up a
lot of peripheral fatigue?
Or is it, you know, something else that's happening?
Essentially, one of the things that you can look at, one of the areas of the literature that you can
look at to help you understand that argument is to look at the motivational section of the
literature.
Because motivation has an immediate effect on how many reps we can achieve to failure or how much
strength we have, how much force we can generate at any given moment in time.
And that fits perfectly into Marcora's psycho biological model of fatigue.
Now, I know that at the moment people are arguing whether or not Marcora's model applies to strength
training.
You know, I think it does.
I think it fits very, very well.
I think we've got some really good strength training studies showing that perception of effort, you
know, actually reflects the sensation of innovation in strength training situations.
So there's a really good study actually that Mark Hora was an author of showing that when you're
doing biceps curves with different loads or different states of fatigue, then RPE is very closely
related to the central motor command.
So ultimately, you know, there's some really nice data showing that part of the model, this part of
the motivational side, again, we're going to talk about today.
So basically going to talk about how motivation can be changed with a variety of different things.
And that comes back to your introduction, Jake, where you said that we're going to show people how
to get stronger instantaneously.
And this is totally true.
So if you just want to ignore the whole kind of muscular failure argument and say how can I get
stronger immediately, then all of this stuff that we're going to talk about today is going to apply.
So you don't have to treat this as like, OK, this is an insight into how muscular failure works.
It could literally just be how when I get stronger, well, here's a whole bunch of things you can do.
So essentially we're going to walk through I think 8:00 or so different things that relate to
improving motivation and motivation increases strength by increasing motor unit recruitment.
And there's actually some really nice studies demonstrating that that exactly what happens by virtue
of an increase in voluntary activation.
So I'm not just kind of saying, oh, I'll get stronger now I'm infill ring the titties by way of an
increase in merging the criminal, though I don't actually think there is any other possible
explanation, but ultimately that we do have the voluntary activation data showing that.
So why is that important?
Well, basically the only existing model for connecting the motivation with motive recruitment is
Marcora's psycho biological model of fatigue, which shows that the sensation of innovation is
increasing motive recruitment.
Sorry, all the way around, the central motor command is creating an increase in motive recruitment,
but simultaneously, the central motor command is creating the sensation of innovation, which then
produces a perception of effort.
And when we reach our maximum tolerable perception of effort, we then have to stop increasing MOTI
agreement because to do so we'll be to try and go past the maximum tolerable perception of effort.
So ultimately there's just a, a feedback loop going on there.
So basically we have a clear model that says that if I have a, if I have reached my maximum RPE
because sensation of innovation has been, you know, contributing to that RPEI can't go past that
point.
And then how do I actually use motivation to influence how much motor unit equipment I can generate?
Well, very simply, if I'm more motivated, I am prepared to tolerate a more disagreeable sensation.
That's it.
So essentially, I'm in a scenario where I'm experiencing a very high level of effort perception
that's extremely discomforting, and I decide emotionally that I'm not prepared to go past that point
and therefore I'm not prepared to then increase the sensation of innovation any further.
If I won't increase the sensation of innovation any further, then I won't decrease motor unit
equipment any further and I essentially stop exercising at that point.
I could carry on if I were able to access more motor units, but I don't because I'm not prepared to
experience a more disagreeable perception of effort.
Then circumstances change and I become instantaneously more motivated and at that point I'm then
able to increase my level of effort tolerance.
And I do that because I am motivated to do so.
And that then brings me a higher level of recruitment and I can then continue exercising or achieve
a higher level of force output or where it is whatever it is that I'm trying to do.
So we've got a really, really clear model here of how motivation is linked to motive recruitment
increases in specific scenarios.
Is that all making sense?
It does.
Is, is any of that conscious?
So does anyone make a conscious decision because you've used a, you'd used a word there.
I think at some point, like I think we, we decide or there's some implication of a decision.
Are we actually aware that we are almost stopping ourselves from tolerating more effort?
Do you think that people make decisions cognitively or emotionally?
I would say both.
I think 99.9% of people 99.9% of the time make decisions emotionally and then rationalize those
decisions cognitively if you ask them why they've done it.
Yeah, that's probably fair.
Yeah.
So I think that decisions are mostly, if not almost exclusively, emotional for most people most of
the time.
I think that most people also will deny that if you ask them and tell you that it's cognitive, but I
think most people are making emotional decisions most of the time.
I think I hear what you're saying.
I wonder if you could make a pre emptive decision that would be cognitive as opposed to almost like
a reactive decision which is emotional.
I think that the more emotion that you, and actually I saw you post about this recently, I think
that the more emotions you are feeling, the harder it is to be cognitive.
Yeah.
So this is kind of the, this is starting to get into areas of sport which are more kind of, how can
I put this?
They are, they're more susceptible to the emotional side of things.
So in the zone that we're going to be talking about strength training, the room for manoeuvre in
terms of this kind of emotional side of things is relatively small and it happens very quickly.
If you look at the more endurance style events, you can see this happening over much longer periods
of time.
So if you look at like especially even ultra endurance type events, then people can actually be
battling this emotional state that they're in for hours of hours and hours and hours of, of, of a
run.
And it literally just comes down to can you manage your emotional state to stay in the zone where
you're focused on the goal that you're trying to achieve and not on how unhappy you are?
Yeah.
Because that's really what it comes down to in those scenarios.
It's can you get your mind focused on the thing that you're trying to achieve and not focused on the
attraction of stopping doing what you're doing because it's more comfortable to stop.
Ultimately that goal switching, which is I think what you posted about is the all attention
switching is the issue because people think that we have like a willpower kind of sort of quantity.
It's like the depletion of willpower happens over the course of a day and it's not actually what's
happening.
We don't experience a depletion of our willpower because that would imply that when we kind of
finished the task and we'd run out of willpower to continue doing the task that we were doing that
you wouldn't be able to then do something different.
That's not actually what happens.
Now, what happens is you simply that you switch your focus of attention from the thing.
I'm not talking about focus of attention in a kind of a like external, internal focus of attention
type thing.
I'm doing about your emotional focus of attention.
So if you're emotionally focused on what you're trying to achieve, then you can carry on doing the
thing that you're doing.
But what happens is as you start to feel disagreeable sensations building up and the comfort of
stopping starts to kind of twist your gaze across to the idea of just kind of collapsing at the side
of the track and sitting down and enjoying the fact that you're not.
Making yourself miserable anymore, that focus of attention starts to get diverted away from what
you're trying to achieve and more towards the attraction of just stopping doing the miserable thing
that you're doing.
And the more you get pulled away from what you're trying to achieve and towards the comfort of not
doing what it is that you're currently doing, the more likely it is that you're going to end up, you
know, kind of being defeated by your opponent who is more focused on the goal that they're trying to
achieve.
And that's when you're looking at all this kind of super endurance, ultra endurance type activity.
That's really the mindset of the people that are super successful in those scenarios.
They're able to just stop their focus switching because they've got this kind of sort of drive
inside them which they've managed to build or create or condition, which allows them to continually
latch onto the thing they're trying to achieve as being so much more important than all the other
stuff that they're being attracted to in the moment.
That allows them to stop feeling those disagreeable sensations.
So those kind of scenarios are so much easier to visualize and understand than the strength training
side of things.
But the exact same rules apply, just happening over a much shorter period of time.
Yeah, in in the post that I shared about it, I use an example of and I guess this is relevant
actually to a topic we'll talk about in a moment, but deciding at the start of your set that this is
the point I'm going to get.
I'm going to do this when you repetition.
So I'm not going to question because it's so easy to get to 15 repetitions in if you're doing a
higher upset, not that many people who are listening probably are.
But then question was that my last trip to do I can I do anymore?
Can I do one more?
Should I do one more?
Should I stop now?
And by actually making that decision, the start of the set, hey, I'm not going to even question this
until I hit 15 repetitions or whatever that goal is it, it takes away that decision crisis point
where you're questioning is that the point I stop?
Is this the point?
And that's what I mean about is there potentially some cognitive decision making we can make when
it's premeditated before we do this?
Remotely cognitive.
Oh, OK, so you can, you can make a OK, so the more emotional, the greater the emotional state that
somebody is in, the less likely it is that they'll make a cognitive decision.
Yes, yes.
So making the cognitive.
Decision, what you're doing is you're making the cognitive decision before you go into the emotional
state is then going to give you a higher probability of coming through the experience in the way
that you want to.
I agree, yeah.
Anyway, I I forget where you were headed before I derail you with that.
Just kind of talking in general terms about decision making, being emotionally kind of driven in
most cases, most of the time, and especially in states of, you know, kind of discomfort as we're
going to find in most exercise scenarios.
So the point is though, that we have a very clear model for how motivation is increasing performance
and it's doing it by increasing motine recruitment.
And ultimately that ties into the whole muscular failure argument that people are having at the
moment by showing that we can instantaneously increase recruitment.
And if that is possible, if I can instantaneously increase recruitment, that means that the level of
recruitment that you were using 10 seconds ago was not maximal.
And a lot of these studies we're going to talk about are done in strength trained people and even
athletic populations.
Many of these studies are done in athletic populations, especially the stuff we'll talk about
towards the end, so.
That's not really important point.
That's essential because I know what the answer is going to be when I, when people kind of start
quoting this podcast.
All the people who are determined to disagree with everything that I say, and we know who those
people are, but you know, all the people who are determined to disagree with everything that I say
are just going to turn around and go, Oh well, no, no, no, all that stuff only applies to untrained
people, you know, and trained people, they can achieve maximum levels of recruitment without being
motivated garbage.
We've got really good studies showing that a lot of this stuff actually works in strength training
people.
And actually it has been actually studied more.
Some of this stuff as we'll get to it in strength training people because it's being used in the
athletic context.
You know, a lot of this stuff with bar speed is actually done in athletes because they're actually
interested in testing it in athletic context.
Because all the velocity based training stuff was done in athletes because that's what they want to
test it in because that's the only people who are using it.
People using velocity based training or just going to the gym to, you know, kind of look a bit
better.
It's just irrelevant to them.
So all the velocity based stuff is being done in athletes anyway.
Let's get stuck into these these things because there are a lot to get through.
So I've got a list here, so I'm just going to go through them.
Verbal encouragement has been something that sports scientists have used in maximum voluntary
symmetric contraction testing since day one.
I mean, basically they shout encouragement while somebody is doing a strength test because they know
that it improves performance in the strength test.
If you don't shout encouragement when somebody's doing the test, even if you've told them to do
maximal effort, they still won't produce as much force in an isometric contraction than if you're
standing next to them shouting encouragement.
People respond positively to other people standing next to them shouting encouragement.
It's because we are social creatures and we appreciate and value and respond to emotionally the
surrounding people who especially in this context, are giving us positive input to what we are
doing.
So there you go, increases in motivation, instantaneously created by other people standing next to
us.
I think anyone who's ever been a personal trainer can easily attest to this.
If you've got a client who's doing a Max effort lift, obviously you're going to verbally encourage
them and obviously you're going to see better performance when you do so.
Exactly.
And there's actually a kind of carry on from that, which is my second point on my list, which is
that the phenomenon of social work or social facilitation is wider than just somebody standing there
shouting encouragement.
You can literally notice a observer effect.
So if you've got, if you're in the gym on your own, generally speaking, you will be less motivated
than if you've got just other people also working in the same gym as you at the same time.
So if you've got three or four other people in the same area, you will naturally work harder than if
those people are not there.
That is, again, just a social facilitation phenomenon.
We respond positively to the presence of other people.
Most of us respond positively to other people.
You know, there's troglodytes like me who prefer not to be around the people, but that's, you know,
I'm like not a, not a, not a normal case.
So that is that is a kind of wider phenomenon.
And again, just the simple presence of other people tends to be very positive.
Yes, you can find exceptions to that.
As I say, I'm a really good example, but there are other scenarios as well, a slight competitive
environment.
You can take that thing a step further.
And this, this again, is a situation where we tend to, I'm just going to try and make sure that as I
go through this list, I do sort of mention examples of where there are a, you know, kind of sort of
definite data in strength training people.
This competitive environment 1 is a strength trained scenario, kind of that has it has been tested
in a strength training scenario.
So we know that when you put strength training people in a competitive environment, they tend to
perform better than when they're not in a competitive environment.
So, you know, not just a verbal encouragement, not just the presence of other people, but actually
saying I'm going to try and do my best because the other guy, you know, the other person is going to
be also doing their best.
And there's a kind of rivalry there.
And I want to kind of win this particular competition.
So put people in a competitive environment most of the time, not all the time.
There are exceptions to that again, but you know, put people in a competitive environment and they
generally will try harder and put more effort in.
There's variances there in terms of coordination and stuff, but if the coordination is relatively
minimal, then generally speaking the effort tends to be the overriding factor because when people
feel self-conscious, coordination tends to go down.
But if it's not a coordination limiting factor, then effort tends to be the primary, most important
driver of the performance.
And competitive scenarios will tend to allow you to produce more effort because you are, you are
literally prepared to experience a more painful scenario in order to be competitive in that
scenario, because it is worth more to you to do so in that situation.
I mean, that's literally that simple.
It's like, you know, if you're on your own, there's nobody around, there's nobody encouraging you,
There's nobody to, to, to compete against what literally what is your motivation?
Would you work as hard as if you've got a scenario where you've got more to win?
I mean, this is what it comes down to.
It's like, you know, what is the kind of cost benefit analysis that's being done emotionally inside
of you in this scenario?
I think we've allowed a narrative about how exercise works that is completely wrong to pervade the
industry whereby, you know, we somehow think that, you know, we are this kind of God like creature
that can just tell ourselves to produce maximum levels of motive equipment without having any kind
of, you know, limitation on that.
And that's just not true.
We've got a massive emotional limitation on how much effort we're prepared to just, you know, sort
of withstand in any given scenario.
And all of these factors, we're going to modify that in the moment and you're going to end up with
differing levels of recruitment accordingly.
So clearly showing us that recruitment is limited by the maximum tolerable position of effort and
clearly showing us how we might go about pushing that level up in a given scenario.
So again, for people who are listening to this from a practical point of view, if you want to
increase your strength instantaneously, give yourself a reason.
Give yourself multiple reasons.
You know, go to the gym with a gym partner, get them to give you encouragement.
You know, have some kind of gentle rivalry with them on different exercises.
Even if you've got different levels of strength, try and have your own kind of way of adjusting for
that.
You're going to find you get stronger, produce more effort and get better results because your
recruitment levels are higher.
I mean both of those points so far.
Basically if you have a training partner, you can achieve both of those.
Like, it's fairly easy to actually implement.
Yeah, but there's levels of success that can be achieved within that.
So you know, just going to the gym with somebody and chatting with them and doing, it's not going to
do anything.
No, you need.
To be intentional about how you're.
Intentional about how and you're intelligent about how you construct that I mean, if I go to the gym
with someone who, you know, weighs 300 lbs, then it's not going to be a very fun experience unless
we're doing pull ups, which gets to be a very funny experience.
There's not going to be a very kind of, you know, when they they're basically almost twice my is not
really going to be very, you know, fair competition and I.
Mean, how often do you hear bodybuilders in the past say that they, they would go to gyms where
there were people who were bigger than them, You know, that motivation of other bodybuilders, other
people who, who are stronger or, you know, bigger, whatever that gave them the motivation to perform
better.
You know, so it's ultimately it's the same thing.
Perhaps.
I think there might be something else going on there, but.
Better access to, so are they.
Important, important factors.
But anyway, let's try not to get too distracted.
So, yeah, so straightaway, you know, hopefully people are listening to this, are seeing the really
huge importance of motivation in performance and the ways in which we can manipulate that.
Let's move on to another one.
And this is one that is very kind of emotionally attractive to me is the idea of autonomy.
So one of the really interesting things that's come out of motor learning is that if you give people
a little bit of autonomy in a motor learning task, they actually learn more quickly.
So that's something that started in there and it's come across into strength training.
And we've discovered that not only does it assist in motor learning and the improvement,
coordination and the successful performance of actions in a accurate way, it also increases the
motivation and therefore enhances motor unit recruitment through the exact same method that we've
talked about previously.
So somebody has autonomy and autonomy just means that they have some control over their environment.
So this is one of those things I think is relatively straightforward for those of us who are, you
know, going to the gym on our own, especially when the gym is quiet, we've got all the autonomy that
we can kind of really dream of largely kind of self determined in that scenario.
I think the autonomy issue really is something that personal trainers need to avoid squashing.
So if you've got a client and your tendency is to just cut, and I see this a lot actually in the
mainstream kind of sort of fitness industry, I see a lot of scenarios where the client is literally
just has no clue what's going to happen next.
And the personal trainer just says, do this.
There's no explanation, there's no context, there's no guidance, there's no expectation.
It's all just like do this and the person just does that and I can see immediately that the
motivation is not there from the start of that.
They need to kind of build their own motivation then from being dropped into that scenario and it
clearly is not allowing them to exert maximum levels of effort in that particular situation.
So a lack of autonomy is definitely going to create a problem, and I think it does create a really
big problem in a lot of situations for a lot of people working with personal trainers.
So I think giving people a little bit of freedom within the context of the sort of training
programme or the workout that they're doing is really good way to allow them to achieve higher
levels of effort.
And there's a whole bunch of ways that you can do that.
You can start at the very beginning.
So when somebody is coming into the gym and they're starting their session, I think it's really cool
to give them a lot of freedom about the exact type of warm up that they do.
Do they want to use this machine to do a 5 minute, 10 minute warm up?
And do they want to use that machine?
Do they want to do something else over there?
Whatever.
Because honestly, it doesn't matter really.
They're just kind of getting that kind of muscle temperature increase as long as they're using a,
you know, if they're doing a leg workout or whatever, or they're doing full body workout, whatever.
And you start them on treadmill or a cross trainer or a bike, but it's their choice.
Then you've introduced some autonomy because they have made the self determined choice to do
something that they want to do.
It achieves the same goal, but they've chosen to do it.
And that then elevates their motivation because we like to do things that we want to do.
We're choosing machines in many ways.
Whether we understand those choices and why we'd make them as a separate question.
I'm not going to go to philosophical today, so I've probably gone way too philosophical already with
the whole kind of, we make emotional decisions all the time spiel.
But let's just stick with that as being a thing that I think is unlikely to affect.
Most Lifters are going to the gym on their own, but it's absolutely going to affect personal trains
working with clients.
Well, actually I think an interesting aspect of that is people, people will approach a personal
trainer because they think it's good for the results.
They think they're going to get a better outcome doing that than doing their own thing.
And sometimes, and you know, we talked about this actually I think in the first episode of this year
where we're talking about mistakes that personal trainers are making with new clients.
When your workout mistakes people are making, sometimes the limitation of APT session actually means
that you're more limited than you would be if you were just doing that session by yourself.
And obviously there's going to be context to that.
If you don't know what you should be doing or you know what's going to work in the gym, obviously
having APT will be beneficial.
But you know, beyond the fact that you're limited to whatever that time slot is, 30 minutes, 45
minutes, whatever it is, there's you know, what you've pointed out here where you're actually giving
up your autonomy in most cases.
So one thing that I do in my online groups, which is obviously a little bit different to on the gym
floor, but I try to identify what are the things here and you sort of mentioned it, what are the
things that don't particularly matter that I can offer some flexibility in?
So what I allow people to do is I'll use a wider repetition range.
And instead of saying you need to do 6 to 8 repetitions, you need to do fives or whatever, usually
I'll give them, it might be say 5 to 12 or 5 to 10 or whatever it might be.
And I say, hey, if you, if you just always want to go between 5:00 to 7:00, do that.
If you always want to go between 8:00 to 10:00, do that.
I don't mind.
And then I'll also give usually a few different exercise substitutions.
And I say this exercise just doesn't do it for you.
These other exercises all achieve the exact same thing.
You pick the one you want.
I don't care, stick with it.
I don't want you to swap each week.
You stick with that exercise the next 8 weeks, 12 weeks, however long it is, but do the one that you
want to do and at least you've got some choice there.
And that's going to motivate you.
So I think as coaches, I, I, if you're working online, if you're working in person, trying to find
ways that you can offer a little bit of that autonomy to your client is ultimately going to get them
the better results.
It's going to make you look better.
And it's it shouldn't be that hard to do as long as you can identify what are the things that's not
going to take away from the efficacy, but actually going to enhance it.
Yeah, totally.
I think that's really, really valuable point there.
So essentially anytime somebody's doing a training program and they feel like they are doing
something that they don't want to do, that's going to drop the motivation, that's going to drop the
recruitment, that's going to drop the effectiveness of that exercise.
So all that, you know, kind of Rep range or whatever.
So always better to kind of pick a Rep range or an excise that's slightly less kind of optimal from
a biomechanical point of view in the eyes of your coach and and pick one that you like better.
I mean, as long as it's doing the same thing.
I mean, it kind of you can take this to an extreme and it doesn't work.
I mean, they grow their calves doing, you know, kind of.
You've.
Got to kind of do something that actually does do the thing that you want it to do, but within that,
you know, zone it's it's within the within the kind of range of things that achieve.
Boundary condition is then you can allow flexibility.
And I would always, I would always go for the one that you'd like doing better.
But people take it to an extreme and they, they kind of go, oh, I can do this exercise and it's
going to give me a better result because I like doing this exercise more.
I like doing this way of training more.
And I want no, not really because you can outside the boundary conditions.
So kind of got to stay within the boundary conditions of things that do that thing.
But within that, I think, yeah, motivation is a big deal.
So motoring agreement is always going to be something to chase.
Cool.
So autonomy, honestly, most people are listening to their supporting and we're going not sure
autonomy really applies to me and it probably doesn't.
A lot of coaches will be listening to their coaches so they can implement that, yeah.
Absolutely.
I'm going to pick one next.
That is, you know, not going to be a surprise to anybody, which is that listening to music can
increase your motivation and that's going to increase your performance.
And it does that by increasing Motiene Agreement.
I find this one enormously ironic because some of the people who are arguing that there's no
limitation on Motiene Agreement are some of the same people who post repeatedly about the music that
they enjoy listening to when they're doing exercise because it motivates them.
And that's.
Just fantastic.
Ironic.
There's all these playlists and people go, yeah, this play Phil is really motivating, fires me up to
train.
I'm like, OK, aren't you the same guy who says that there's no such thing as a budget for MOTI
recruitment, that you can just maximize, maximally recruit all the motifs who want in any exercise
that you're doing, even if it's got all the muscles working in the body at the same time, It's like,
OK, so you can't actually see how these things connect.
You're not actually thinking about any of this stuff.
You're just kind of posting stuff that you've kind of fed into AAI engine and it's spat out an
answer for you, you know, so.
Music, if it is loud enough to kind of get you going, obviously, you know, don't listen to any music
that's too loud, But if it's loud enough to get you going and it's upbeat and exciting and you like
it and all of those characteristics.
Well, that's key that you actually like it.
I'm pretty sure they've wasn't there study where music.
You can have, you can have music that's loud enough but is and also is a high fast tempo, but you
don't like it, then it won't do the job.
You actually have to.
It has to fit all three of those criteria.
So if the music's too quiet so you can't hear it, or if it just doesn't really register for you,
then it won't do anything.
If it's slow tempo, it won't do anything for you.
And if you obviously don't like it won't do anything for you.
So it has to fit those 3 criteria simultaneously really to make a difference.
So again, just increasing your motivation, firing you up, putting you in a better mood, increasing
the level of effort that you are prepared, tolerate.
This is all just, you know, adding to this basic model, which is that we're trying to increase the
maximum level of effort that we are prepared to tolerate.
And motivational increase is a really good way of doing that.
Moving on to some of the stuff that is simultaneously most interesting from a physiological point of
view and also getting back into that territory of working with athletes and strength trained people.
Visual feedback is a really cool one.
And this is one that has been tested with voluntary activation measurements.
So a lot of the other stuff we've talked about so far, really the only data we've got is just
showing increase improvements in performance as a result of the increase in motivation.
So there's kind of like a very tiny window where you could kind of people can argue the point
against you because they can go, well, you know, you haven't got data showing that voluntary
activation increases.
Therefore, I'm going to pretend that that means that, you know, it could happen for another reason.
I'm like, OK, what mechanism could that be?
And then they sort of ignore you and go and talk about something else because there isn't anything.
I mean, recruitment is pretty much the only thing that can really change in those scenarios and
contribute to increase in performance.
Visual feedback.
We actually do have voluntary activation measurements showing that if you're doing a maximal effort
voluntary isometric contraction, if you do that with and without visual feedback, you'll get higher
motine at recruitment levels as measured by voluntary activation in the scenario where you've got a
visual feedback representation of your performance.
So if you've literally got, you know, literally just two lines on a screen and you can see the line
going up as you increase more force, that is visual feedback of your performance.
And you will tend to find that with that visual feedback, you get a higher level of effort and you
are able to tolerate and therefore a high level of motive improvement and a high level of
performance in that strength test.
So just to repeat myself, this is a maximum voluntary isometric contraction lasting 3 to 5 seconds.
We are not talking about things that take 4 hours to do.
Yeah, we are literally talking about seconds worth of contraction.
This is as kind of maximal effort thing that people are currently claiming is determined entirely by
peripheral factors.
And I am showing you without any shadow of any doubt that this is being governed by the brain and
not by the muscle.
This is not a debate.
This is literally the easiest thing in the world to demonstrate just by looking at the data that we
have available.
So 3 to 5 seconds of us of maximize isometric contraction is being altered by your perception of
effort tolerance.
So that's visual feedback and you can actually kind of push that another step further and go, OK,
let's come.
And actually you mentioned it earlier coming back to this idea of performance targets.
So you can do well.
Actually just before you go to performance to go back to visual.
So like you just said that you've actually blended visual with performance.
Now I wonder can you get any stimulus from the visual, some visual stimulus by itself without
performance.
So the one I'm wondering that when we're talking about audible a stimulus a moment ago, there's I
talked to you earlier today about a study where they had people doing a Max hand grip.
They were usually done moment as well and only a 5 second isometric with a hand grip device.
And they actually had visual, they didn't have visual feedback.
They had a visual stimulus.
So they had like a light that went off and I think it's in goes lit up as they go.
And I think that alone was actually enough to increase peak force.
But then when they paired that with a very loud noise was like 1/2 a second loud noise, almost like
a gunshot.
Then it went up even more.
So by actually combining both the visual and the audio.
OK, so OK, let's rewind because this is actually not closer to visual feedback because it's actually
close to music.
So when we've got that music playing, oh, I said it's it's loud, it's fast tempo, it's enjoyable.
That's increasing our motivation primarily by changing our mood state.
And that changing mood state then allows us to achieve high level of effort tolerance and therefore
high level mote in equipment.
So the motivation is happening by changing our mood state.
And I think really what you're describing there is close to that.
It's not so much visual feedback, it's visual.
Feedback is.
It Yeah.
So it's actually, it's before feedback.
It's actually changing your mood state before you even get involved.
In fact, this actually also reminds me of another.
So I mean, honestly, this field is gigantic.
So much stuff.
So much I'm there.
There's also, I mean, we we talked actually about this recently.
There's this famous study of rugby players.
So again, athletes, I mean, I guarantee you, I'm just going to say this again.
I guarantee you that as soon as people start talking about the stuff on this podcast, all the usual
suspects will fold their arms and say all of that only applies to untrained people.
I'm just going to repeat it again.
This stuff is being measured in athletes.
This stuff is being measured in strength trained people.
This is already been tested in all of those populations and it all works.
It works exactly the same way as it works and untrained people, it works in strength trained people
as well.
So when you've got all this nonsense where people go, Oh well the bilateral force deficit doesn't
apply in trained people.
Yes it does.
All the studies being used to argue for bilateral facilitation and nonsense, they're literally
changing stability and that's why the apparent facilitation effect is happening.
Same thing is happening here.
They're just going to go Oh well you know, motivational stuff only works in untrained people.
No, we've got it tested in strength trained people and even athletes.
So rugby players, rugby players doing 3 Rep maxes, rugby players doing 3 Rep maxes, you play them a
training montage.
So you can imagine your favorite kind of rocky training montage being played before you do a three
Rep Max squat and they're getting higher three Rep Max squat performances.
So again, like I said before, this is really, really heavy kind of end of the spectrum.
Like we talked about the maximum volunteer isometric contraction of three to five, three to five
seconds.
Again, three Rep maxes.
It's pretty close to maximum levels of strength that we're talking about here and rugby players
doing those three Rep maxes are having their performances increased by watching some kind of
exciting training montage before they start.
So mood change, mood change improvement increases your level of effort that you're now prepared
tolerate because you're in a better emotional state that allows you to achieve high levels of
recruitment, achieve high levels of performance.
Same thing with your example of the, you know, flashing lights and loud noises.
Same thing with the exciting music.
All of this is the same stuff.
It's all working the same way and it's all applying by and it's all applying to scenarios of, you
know, extremely high force application, high F application over very short periods of time.
So all the arguments that people are going to come out with, oh, this doesn't apply in strength
training context.
Oh, this doesn't apply in untrained people already answered that.
And I'm already showing you that it does apply in those scenarios.
So the people who arguing against it haven't done the reading or they're being disingenuous and just
denying that these studies exist.
That was me getting a little bit shirty, but I'm just pretty.
So yeah, we went back a step there because we went back to the music stuff, but we also then went
through the visual feedback, which is feedback related to your performance in the moment.
So whether that's a line on the screen showing the level of force you're producing, whether that's a
number, we've got some really nice data in athletes where they just do, like I was mentioning
velocity based training earlier, they do repetitions.
Where they do is Max effort repetition and they get a bar speed number.
If you don't show them what that number is, they produce 1 level of performance.
Even though you're saying I want you to lift the bar as fast as you possibly can.
They do it like a squat Rep with, I don't know, 5060% to one more Max.
They move as fast as they can.
You turn the screen around and you show them the number and now they get a better number because
they can see the number and they're like, now I want to push that number up.
They're motivated to do so.
More effort means more recruitment.
Through the sensational innovation, they get a higher level of performance and it's literally just
because they're achieving access to more mode units and therefore improving the number of fibers
that are activated and achieving a higher level of force output as a result.
So for individuals or coaches who want to use these techniques, so the the music, I mean, that's an
easy one.
And if you're a coach, but I used to work in the gym floor, I would always ask every one of my
clients, hey, what do you want to listen to?
I put on music that they want us to listen to, even if it is stuff that I absolutely detested
because I knew it to be motivating for them.
Given your given your taste in music, I'm not sure that's difficult because you have pretty strange
taste in music from my perspective.
From your perspective, OK people?
'S perspective is but definitely it looks strange to me.
What music do you like?
That is not going to be disclosed on this book.
I wondered when I asked like is this too personal?
OK, there we go.
It is.
So music isn't an easy one you can implement.
Struggle with boundaries.
Not something I struggle with at all.
So yeah, you're not going to find that out.
And then performance related feedback, I mean that one, you can be creative with that.
Now that will be easier as a coach.
If you're a coach on the gym floor with a client, then you can set them a target or you can,
depending on you know what it is, what exercise you're doing, it might be.
Well, the cool thing is that targets actually seem even more effective than simply just giving
performance related feedback.
So there's a difference between saying somebody, you know, just telling people what their kind of
numbers were last time and then telling them how the numbers are this time.
There's a difference between doing that and actually saying last time you achieved 7 reps with this
weight, let's try and hit 8 reps today.
You've now changed that thing slightly and you've actually not just given them feedback, but you've
given them a target to try and hit.
And you can do that with.
I mean, it's been done in the context of bar speeds.
I mean, you literally say to somebody, this was your number of bar speed last time.
We're going to try and hit a round Number of this.
It's a higher number this time.
You actually find that they start to push those numbers up even further than they would have done
just being given the, uh, you know, the, the, the feedback information.
So targets are really interesting because I think they, they push people even further along in terms
of their motivation is that it's not just a, it's not just that you're trying to exceed something
you've done previously.
You're now trying to move towards something that you might have only achieved tomorrow or the day
after if you'd not given that been given that target today.
So that, I mean, that's, that's a really interesting situation because you're actually maybe getting
even more benefits.
Yeah.
And that's easy enough to do.
Like if you have a log books, actually know what weight you have been using in the past.
And then if you have a progression model you're following, then that essentially allows you to have
a target you're aiming for.
So that's something I would have with each of my groups.
And I actually try to give people a target based on the experience level.
So I'd say look, if you're a beginner, this is your target.
I want you to add 1 repetition in this workout on top of what you did last workout.
And at the intermediate, I'll change the target.
I'll say, look, what I want to do is pick one workout this week.
And I want to add 1 repetition to each exercise once this week, not three times, just once this
week.
And then the advance I'll reduce.
I'll say, look over the two week period, I want to add 1 repetition.
So actually adjusting that target.
So it's actually I guess achievable for that individual based on the experience level.
In terms of feedback, is an easy way to include feedback for either for yourself or for a client.
Not beyond simply just counting the number of reps that you're doing.
I mean, obviously if you have, if you're working with athletes and you're measuring bar speeds, then
yeah.
That's easy.
Super useful feedback mechanism, but if you're just in a bodybuilding context then no you you're
just going to be counting reps.
But I mentioned to you at the start of actually before we started recording that there was some new
equipment I'd use from Techno Gym and they actually had you.
You would perform the first repetition and it would monitor your range of motion and your speed.
And then it would show you on the little screen for each additional repetition you were doing, how
you were stacking up against your first repetition speed and range of motion.
And that was really interesting.
Even for me doing that.
I was just doing a lap pull down.
But I could see as I was getting towards the last couple of repetitions, my range of motion was just
reducing ever so slightly, maybe 5% or so.
And it was motivating for me to actually try to hit that.
So that was, I guess almost entertaining as feedback within the asset itself.
But you're not many people are going to have access to equipment like.
That sure, sure, I think.
I think the the simple counting of repetitions and tracking with a logbook is worth 80 to 90% of
anything that we can do here, especially in a hypertrophy contact.
We just keep a record and you know, keep just kind of pushing forward to beat the logbook.
I mean, it really just comes back to that in terms of this, you know, performance feedback side of
things, you know, and if that that mean that should be, that should be motivating to us.
And there's the start, I'll say there's all this other stuff we can do as well with the motivational
side of things.
I mean, it's we're not.
Not.
We're not limited.
It's just one of these, yeah.
Yeah, it's loads of things we can do.
So I think to finish up the list, it's worth mentioning that there are things that you can do.
The Todd demotivating.
And I already mentioned one of these, which is like if you're working with a personal trainer and
they kind of just pulling you from one part of the gym to another without telling you what's
happening and you've got no choice in what you're doing.
And they just say do this, do this, do this.
That is demotivated because you're losing autonomy so.
Or giving them exercises that they actively don't like.
I saw this so often when I worked in the gym.
It's someone to be like.
We know what exercises don't you like.
I hate squatting.
Oh well you need a squat I'm going to make you squat.
It's like they actively just told you that is A1 exercise they did test doing and you're giving it
to them.
Yeah, I know, I know.
So.
But again, there's fascinating kind of exploration that can be done in interpersonal dynamics,
though I'm not going to comment in terms of like a more kind of formulate way of thinking about
this.
Anything that is going to require cognitive effort from us can create effort perceptions that then
chew up our PE that we would otherwise want to devote to motor unit recruitment or the sensation of
innovation.
So essentially, if you're thinking about the psychobiological model of T, you've got your sensation
of effort, sorry, your sensation of innovation being created by the motor equipment signal on one
side.
And on the other side you've got the RPE.
And if all of your RPE is taken up with sensation of innovation, fantastic that that gives you the
highest possible chance of hitting a really high level of recruitment.
Now you can increase that by any of the motivational stuff we talked about because you simply
increase the capacity of RPED, of prepared tolerate.
But if you've got RPE being chewed up by other things, and obviously I normally talk about
cardiovascular sensations and burning sensations in the muscle and you know, interleuk and all that
kind of stuff.
And that's the most kind of important thing when you're constructing a training program.
But if you have cognitive load because you are thinking about other things, if you go into the gym
and your brain is full of work related stress and thoughts and you know, kind of plans and you know,
whatever else that you've been doing today is chewing up space in your brain, you're probably going
to find that you don't hit as higher level of kind of sensation of innovation because you've got RPE
associated with these other things.
But in the literature, we've got some really nice data related things like doing a cognitively
demanding task immediately.
I mean, the Stroop test is the famous one.
Do it like a Stroop test or another cognitively demanding task immediately before a string training
worker.
You're going to get fewer reps to failure in your exercises because you simply basically got a brain
full of kind of effort that it's dedicated to other things and that mimics work related activity
really.
But you can also do social media scrolling.
I mean, just give somebody a, you know, a kind of a, a phone to kind of scroll for 10 minutes before
they do a stricturing exercise and they guarantee they'll get fewer reps to failure on the exercise
simply because, again, their brain is experiencing effort perception related to other things.
In this case, I'm not going to comment too much in detail about what I think about social media, but
you know, you get the idea.
It's a negative.
It's a negative thing that people are an emotion that people are experiencing.
Yeah, which is interesting given how travelling social media is now and, you know, everyone filming
all their their exercises and their workouts.
And I struggle with that tension.
Well, like it's all good for me to have the phone on the gym floor.
And I actually.
I like to say just because something's popular doesn't mean it's good.
No, no, no, no.
And, and you know what actually when I do, we talked about periodisation last week and we made the
comment that if you were going to periodise, one way you could periodise would be to have phases
where you're focusing on Modi, energy, recruitment.
When I do program phases, when I'm focusing on Modi and recruitment, what I tell my clients is I'm,
it's so important in this phase that you are using some of these motivational techniques.
And one of them is to avoid this demotivation that comes with social media.
So I actually tell clients in that phase, I need you to put your phone away, use it for music, like
set your music, put it away and that's it.
I do not want you on your phone between sets because it's actually going to take away from the
adaption we're chasing in this phase.
Totally, totally, totally.
So, yeah, I mean, you could have, but again, I mean, some of this stuff is interactive, isn't it?
So if you've got a gym part that you're going with and you're hyping each other up, it's highly
unlikely that each of you are going to start scrolling on your phones because you in that dynamic
that's different.
You're in in the zone, you're with the, you know, the other person.
You're not, hopefully not like reaching for your phone every 10 seconds.
And that motivation is probably negated some of that negative or demotivation that's occurred when
you were if you were scrolling beforehand.
Which actually leads me to a question, Do these stack?
Can you stack different motivational techniques?
I mean, I think you probably can, but I don't think it's linear.
So I think that ultimately it is probably quite non linear in the sense that you have these things
will get you a step forward and then the next step forward that you take from anything else is going
to be half as big.
So if you go from having no motivation whatsoever and you employ one of these techniques that gives
you a decent boost of motivation, that's going to be the biggest effect you're going to get.
And then if you're able to add a little bit more motivation on top of that, then there'll be bit of
additional benefit, but.
I mean, as I say, there are there are studies that have shown you can get incremental effects from
some of this stuff.
So like comparing poems targets, which is performance feedback is a really great one because
obviously you know that that that does show a incremental benefit.
So there's this kind of situations where you can see that.
But as I say, I think it is definitely a nonlinear phenomenon.
So you lick a bit more, and then and then a bit less.
And then a little bit less and then you're probably starting to cap out from a reasonable point of
view.
So again, I think really then it's like it's more of a log scale than a than a kind of a linear
process really.
That makes sense.
The kind of the level of motivational input that you would need to jump up another notch would be so
huge that you wouldn't want to be experiencing it on a daily basis.
You'll probably get a quite a serious disturbance of your stress hormones if you try to kind of
create that level of and actually powerlifters talk about that.
So it's powerlifters who, you know, kind of achieved really amazing performances and they've been
like, I probably only have another one or two of those left in me in my life.
It's just that kind of level of motivation that you reach and you're like, that was a once this year
phenomenon.
I'll, you know, think about maybe try to get that again next year, but there's no way I'm psyching
myself up to that level to do that again anytime soon.
I think that's kind of the territory that you now start.
I'm starting to speculate a little bit obviously, but you know, I think that's the non linear
relationship that we're describing here.
Smelling salts?
Do they do anything from a motivational?
I've got no idea.
I saw a little bit about that once and I didn't really look at it.
I don't know.
I mean again I I wouldn't I wouldn't have been 1 browser.
Too.
It'd be like a loud noise.
I mean, I think some of this stuff is going to be individual, Some of this stuff is going to be
individual.
I mean, the thing about money source is that it's an it's an aversive stimulus.
So you're you're triggering more of a fight or flight type?
Although the loud noise would be like that as well.
Sure.
So, but again, context is contextual sort of cues are important.
So if your loud noise is accompanied by a sort of a light and a flashing go sign, then that starts
to change the sort of nature of that kind of stimulus in the context of it.
You know one thing, loud noise.
Actually I didn't mention this.
They also measured startle.
So they measured that they were testing stimulation of neck muscle that apparently correlates with
someone startled or not and it didn't.
The performance in face was not correlated some of the startled or not, which I think is quite
interesting as well.
Well, again, it'll come back to what people's instinctive responses are to specific threatening
scenarios.
And I think that probably is quite individual, but I'm not just saying that to sound cool.
I actually, I actually have a quite distinctive model about how I think that worked.
But ultimately I think when you've got stimuli that people are responding to the top.
OK, Let me try and create a useful guideline here.
A lot of the stuff that we've talked about is designed to change people's mood in a positive
direction.
So we're we're changing people's move in the positive direction or we are giving them a feeling of
greater reward for achieving the goal that they are currently attempting to achieve.
Yeah, and that's very similar.
They're crossing over because obviously we got a big boost positive emotion in this sort of seeking
of a meaningful goal.
So we're doing positive stuff when we start to and all of that is kind of, you know, elucidated by
all of these examples that we talked about.
There's a lot to go at when you start bringing in stuff that is kind of just changing fight or
flight response stuff.
So it's not necessarily a positive mood driver, but it does increase sympathetic nervous system
activity.
Then OK, fine, you're probably going to see a positive output in certain variables.
But I don't think it's fitting in exactly the same paradigm as what we've been talking about mostly
today.
I think what we've been talking about mostly today has a more wholesome kind of approach to it in
the sense that, you know, you're not, do you see where I'm going with this?
It's like, I think, I think there's, there's, there's, it's highly unlikely that you're going to see
many downsides of verbal encouragement.
But I guess caffeine probably fits a little bit in that other category you're talking about.
So from what I've seen, and I'm not a nutritionist and I don't pretend to be 1 on the Internet, So
what?
From what I've seen, caffeine does seem to increase performance by increasing voluntary activation.
OK, so that implies that it would fall into a similar category from this stuff.
How it does that, I'm not going to speculate.
You know, I'm not, I don't do that stuff.
It's not my not my bag.
But yeah, I mean, broadly it does probably fall into a similar category of this stuff.
Is it doing that by giving you a positive mood related benefit?
I don't know.
Is it doing it by just making you jittery and increasing sympathetic nervous activity?
I don't know.
I mean, that's for the nutritionist.
Weigh in on that one if they can.
Ultimately what I'm point I'm making here is that I think if I were choosing between things to
implement, I would choose the ones that clearly have a positive mood enhancing kind of flavour to
them.
Like the music and the verbal encouragement and the avoiding negative social media scrolling and all
the kind of stuff that is, you know, visual feedback and things that motivate people from a
attractive point of view.
Rather than saying, oh, let's do something that's really miserable and horrible, like smelling
something that smells absolutely disgusting.
I mean, just to be sensible is what I'm saying and pick stuff that's wholesome and attractive and
positive and moves people in a good direction.
I don't think we want to given that we've got like 8 or 10 things that.
Aren't going to do certainly other options you've got.
Yeah, totally.
Without being miserable about it, why not do those things instead?
I mean, I understand that some people want to do the kind of stuff that is, you know, kind of more
unpleasant because it kind of fits with the self-image of doing things that are difficult.
And I'm not saying that doing difficult things isn't good.
I'm just saying that in this particular context, we don't need to go down that route to get to the
same place.
So why not save that, you know, kind of mental energy that you would have to devote to those
aversive stimuli to another scenario where you can better a, we're better able to spend that
currency in a way that's more productive because there's no other way of doing the thing that you
need to do.
You made the point before.
A lot of people today I just.
You made the point.
Well, I'm good.
I'm glad.
It's hard to pull this out of you sometimes.
I always try to bait you into philosophy.
So you made the point before that some of this will be individually variable, and I think that
that's worth people assessing their own response to some of these.
It doesn't mean competition.
Is a really great example we've got nice date showing that some people you put them in a slightly
competitive environment and it really pushes them in the opposite direction.
So absolutely don't you know, I'm probably in that category.
I always did my best performances in the last practice before a meet.
I would always always be substantially better, meaningfully better.
My coach is always pulling his hair out about that.
But you know, that's just some people are like that, you know, they don't perform as well when
they've got other people, you know, kind of competing against them in the moment.
But again, I think that in the context of strength training, I think that's more likely to be a
coordination late to think you have a spotlight effect.
You think people are watching you start tense up and you perform work because your coordination is
worse in a strength related context, when you're literally just producing force and trying to get
effort levels of motive recruitment, I think it's much less relevant.
So ultimately, if if we're limited by effort and recruitment rather than coordination, I think
you're going to find that irrespective of whether you feel slightly less, you know, kind of
comfortable, you probably still will be able to produce a higher motive recruitment level even if
your performances are slightly lower.
Simply because it's the coordination that's causing your performance to drop off, not the
recruitment level, if that makes sense.
Yeah, I used to train with someone who he would always, he would ask me to spot him and he would
want me in position to spot.
And when I was in position to spot, he would always perform better for me.
If he was then spotting me in that like not hand on the bar, but right next to the bar that would
go, I would perform worse.
It would always demotivate me, having a spotter really close to me and it was motivating for him so.
Your brain your brain is focusing on more things than it needs to focus on so if you've got somebody
too close to you, your.
Brain, there's an awareness of other things.
Yeah, true.
I think that's that is what it was.
Yeah.
Yeah.
So I think it's it's helpful for people to reflect on how do I implement these, these each of these
topics.
There'll be a way that that individual can use that, but it might look a little bit differently for
them.
Now that last point you've brought up before about negative things like these, these unmotivating,
demotivating situations.
And you talked about this true test and you know, there's one study, another Macaur, a study where
they had people do the Stroop test compared to watching a neutral documentary, I think it was.
And those who had done this, this, you know, what would you say mentally fatiguing Stroop tests is
computer assessment.
They performed worse in in squat stunt to failure.
Now, obviously people are not generally doing a Stroop test in day-to-day life, but they are doing
mentally fatiguing work.
And a few weeks ago on a podcast, I mentioned I would check with my my clients, you know, depending
on the type of work that they're involved in, do you actually feel more motivated at the end of a
work day or the start of a work day to go to the gym?
And depending on what work people are doing, they might find that their work day was so mentally
fatiguing that when they do get in the gym, their performance tanks.
And other people that maybe you're doing maybe more mindless work and maybe they're students, maybe
they're not, they're working part time or whatever.
They might perform better at the end of the day.
So I think individuals have to assess themselves as to how does this stuff actually play out in
their own lives and how can they modify when they go to the gym or who do they go to the gym with or
whatever that context is for them.
There's different ways to implement all of this.
Yeah, typically, I mean, that's, that's something everybody's going to have to look at.
You know, it's, it's going to vary between people, what programs and time of days and various
approaches and exercise selections work.
There's always going to be boundary conditions, but, you know, within those boundary conditions,
there's going to be a reasonable amount of wriggle room.
What I like about this area, though, is there's just so much to go out.
So if you're like, well, I don't have a gym pot, I'm like, OK, well, there's a whole bunch of other
stuff you can do instead.
Yeah, it's just so much you can go out and it's all just comes down to the same thing, which is
that, you know, just find a way to motivate yourself.
And hopefully some of the stuff we talked about today is going to give you some ideas of how you can
do that.
And hopefully it could be at least one or two things in there that you can use.
I mean, everybody can use a log book and you know, beating the log book.
So I mean, if that's the only thing you can do, if you could, nothing else.
I mean, that's a big.
Yeah, if nothing else, yeah.
Most people can add music on there somewhere, you know, and they're training on their own.
They've got autonomy, you know, see you moving in the right direction straight away.
I've, I've one more for you and then I'll, I'll let this wrap up.
So Sylvia at Ridge Park, he used to talk about going into the gym, laying on the floor for 5
minutes, letting whatever you'd done during the day just wash away and then visualizing what he was
about to do visualization.
Where does that fit into?
It that is not something that you would start talking about at the end of a podcast.
That doesn't neatly fit into anything you've covered.
It it's just you're, you're opening a lot of extra doors by by bringing that in, a lot of a lot of
visualisation and imagery is going to be coordination influencing.
So there's basically what it comes down to is the brain doesn't differentiate perfectly between
imagined and fake scenarios.
So fake scenarios, imagined and real scenarios.
So basically you have a, you have a real experience and you have an imagined experience.
And the brain doesn't necessarily differentiate between those two in the way that you think it might
youth.
You kind of instinctively think like, OK, so this happened and this did not happen.
And the brain can tell the difference between those two things.
One, yes and no.
So there's like a, there's like a very much a kind of a vague sort of boundary between those two
things.
So it's rehearsal.
So essentially it's it's coordination improvements based on rehearsal.
So you can imagine a like a workout happening and you're actually going to start getting a data set
from that imagine, imagine scenario that is going to feed into your kind of lived experience if you
like.
So it's like a additional set of information your brain is now going to refer to that makes things
complicated really.
I thought this was going to be a mood thing.
OK, I didn't think.
It was going to go, this is, this is messy.
This is really, really messy.
I would rather treat this as a totally separate topic.
And in fact, it's not something that I'm hugely well read in.
It's something that I know enough to kind of comment on it and be aware of it, but it's not
something that I've ever even done an FAQ about.
OK, OK, well, there you go.
There was a little bonus.
I actually think the reason for that is because it would be too big an issue for me to really
tackle.
I think motor, motor learning is something like I go into and I pick very specific things out of and
I come out of it and I go, I'm happy.
I understand that I'm not going to implement that.
But motor learning is a massive area and it's really complicated.
And it's complicated not just because the human brain is complicated, which obviously it is, but
it's complicated because I measurement methods pretty limited in terms of what we can actually
calculate.
So you end up with measurement methods that are not great at testing the thing that you really want
to test.
So like the fundamental question of how do I measure coordination is just like impossible to answer.
I mean like measuring like there are certain very specific ways of measuring coordination which I
have latched onto because they are really clean like proximal to distal sequence.
If somebody is doing a movement that involves approximal to distal sequence, then you can watch the
extent to which that proximal to distal sequence either happens or doesn't happen, and therefore you
know whether coordination is good or bad.
O If somebody is doing a throwing motion and you measure the proximal to distal sequence so you can
see the peak in approximal joint angular velocities happening earlier and at a lower level than the
more distal sort of joints hitting higher levels, higher angular velocities later, then you've got a
very clear approximate distal sequence.
If you fatigue them and then get them to the same motion again and suddenly your approximate distal
sequence disappears and you get similar peaks and joint angular velocity for all of the joints and
they're all happening simultaneously, you've just lost your approximate distal sequence.
You've lost your coordination.
You've, you've seen a reduction in performance as a result of your loss of coordination.
But if I said to you, oh, we haven't got approximate this sequence or you don't have, you're not
measuring that in like just measuring random joint angles and sequences of muscle activation and
performance and stuff like that.
Like, well, and you see those changing over time.
And I'm like, is the coordination getting better or worse?
Or without the performance data, you're not going to know.
You're just looking at random numbers on a screen.
So the actual measurement of coordination is incredibly difficult to do.
And so you now start.
The point I'm making is that when you go and look at the motor laying literature, you have to know
what you're looking for and you have to know why you're looking for it and what you want to achieve,
what that measurement method that you're looking at is telling you.
And a lot of the motor laying literature is really struggling with that fundamental problem, which
is that coordination is really tough to measure.
OK, well, I I apologize.
I imagine your heart sunk when you heard my final question and you thought it's like really
irrelevant.
Anyway, there's plenty of motivational techniques we've covered.
Ignore the the visualization one, but there's about 8:00 or so other motivational things we've
looked at.
So I hope that there's at least one or two there for you guys.
Implement, give it a go in your own training.
Let us know how do you find it?
Did you find your performance went up?
Did you find that your numbers went up?
Did you find that your progress went up?
Increased.
So let us know, we'd love to hear.
That'll be performance feedback for us and it'll be motivation motivating for us in our podcasting.
Anyway, I hope you'll all join us again next week for another topic.