Episode: 040 This new study will change how you think about fatigue
URL: https://open.spotify.com/episode/7CRIBX8Jn19E2on77w7vVz
Published: 2026-02-23
================================================================================

Welcome back.
Thank you for joining us for another episode.
I'm joined by Chris.
How are you doing today?
I'm doing well.
Thanks, Jake.
And today we're going to be talking about a fairly new study, which has really interesting
implications for some ways that you guys might be training in the gym.
So we're going to be talking about fatigue, we're going to be talking about the effects of fatigue,
and we're going to talk a little bit about fatigue in a sense that is going to be new for, I suspect
everyone listening.
And there's gonna be some implications that some of you will be aware of.
And there's gonna be some new implications that you might actually adjust what you're doing in the
gym base of this.
So it's gonna be a fun conversation.
There's gonna be a lot coming out of it.
But before we get there, I have a training plan to discuss with you all.
Now, this training plan is an old school one.
This is silver era in its finest.
So here we've got a 1950 plan by Henry Pascal.
Now this was, I don't know if you, Chris, are you familiar with Henry Pascal?
I've not come across Henry Pascal.
I suspect you'd like him.
He was a a comic book comic.
What would you call it?
A an A cartoonist I guess.
Cartoonist.
And so he had a comic strip called Bosco.
And so Bosco is kind of like his alter ego.
So Pascal was involved with with Hoffman.
We've talked about Bob Hoffman got barbell and a lot of those sort of early silver era kind of
weight lifters.
And so Bosco was Pascal's sort of yeah, alter ego kind of character who was like a kind of your
classic bronze era lifter.
So he was just strong man in a big puffed out chest.
He was a a German kind of strong man and very funny cartoons.
So Pascal was yeah, he wrote a lot about weightlifting as well.
And so this work out comes from a a training log, a training book that he published, which I think
touched on sort of like some of this Bosco staff, you know, some of his own personal training.
And so this was a plan that he was following at the time in 1950.
And he talked about this as a plan that he used simply because he didn't have time to do anymore.
This was his sort of efficiency busy person plan, how to get the most results out of I guess they're
minimal time investment and these are still decently long sessions.
They, they, he said it took him about an hour to hour and a half.
So these are not super short sessions by any stretch of the imagination.
But obviously this time 1950, you know, we had people like Steve Reeves who were doing some, you
know, marathon 2 hour plus workout sessions.
So this sort of hour, hour and a half is potentially half of what some of these other Silver area
lifters are doing now again, 1950.
So we are gonna see some exercises here that are pretty old school and that maybe did drop off in
the coming decade.
So we have been talking about some later plans over the last few episodes.
And, you know, we've talked about some new exercises that started to make their way in over the last
few episodes and you'll see some old exercises appearing here.
So we have 12 exercises, which again was kind of the norm for a lot of the silver era and we have
single sets.
And again, that was an efficiency thing.
And we start with a, he kind of talked about this as like a warming up exercise.
So I, I don't think he was using a lot of load with this exercise.
It was a squat and he was using a, holding a barbell in an overhead position.
So overhead squat.
And again, he did age repetitions with, it wasn't particularly intended to be a hypertrophy
exercise.
Then we go into a barbell curl.
So we've got a two hand barbell curl set of eight, so one set of eight and then go into a seated
swing bar curl.
Now I think we have talked about swing bar curls in the past.
I figure I think Grimmick maybe talked about them.
And so this is not an exercise you see done today.
It's not an exercise you hear anyone talk about.
Essentially it's a, it's a seated barbell curl and you're holding this special apparatus with a
fairly close grip between your legs.
So it's almost like a, it'd be like doing a seated close grip barbell curl, essentially.
So he does one set of 15 repetitions with that and then he goes into what he calls the Bosco
deadlift and shrug.
Now silver era.
So it's nice to see this type of exercise here.
Essentially, the way this exercise was done was a stiff leg deadlift and then in the top position,
they did a shrug.
So I think he would have gone off blocks, but he didn't return to the to the the blocks or the floor
between each repetition.
It was like a standard stiff leg with a shrug at the top.
And that it was done for a set of 10.
And then we go into a, a incline barbell press and he said sometimes you would do this with
dumbbells instead, or you could do with the barbell and that was a set of 10.
And then we have a triceps exercise.
Now I'm going to read out the description he gives of this exercise.
So try to visualize this.
It's a bit of a funny one.
And again, it's not one I've seen anyone do.
I've done it a few times myself.
I think we've talked about possibly this exercise when we've talked about Sid Klein in a really
early episode.
But the way he explains this exercise, he calls it a triceps exercise with dumbbell.
And you would take a pair of dumbbells and they wouldn't be very heavy dumbbells and you would bend
forward from the hips.
So I guess you're in almost like AI guess the end of a good morning position.
And then you would brace yourself and then with your arms hanging down and keeping your arms
straight so you're not bending the elbow, you would then bring your arms directly behind your back.
And you would say you do that until you get that cramping kind of sensation at the top.
So that very shortened position.
And then that was it.
You'd return to the starting position and you go again.
Now he would do 15 repetitions with this and personally when I've experimented with this exercise,
it's very difficult to do this with a heavier load of the lower repetitions and I suspect that's
probably why he was using high reps here.
Then he went into a barbell squat and he was doing the 20 Rep squat, which was obviously very common
at this time.
I don't know if he was pausing between repetitions.
I had a feeling towards the end he would.
So there's different ways of doing this.
We've talked about the 20 Rep squat in the past.
Some people would do a few breaths between each repetition.
Other people would get towards the end of the set, say S, you know, Rep 10 to 15 and then start
implementing the, the, the pauses.
I think he did it that second way.
And then we go into a what he called the Bosco chest lifting breathing exercise.
Now, again, as is normal at this point, people would often do the 20 Rep squat and then they would
do a BA barbell pullover.
And you know, they believed it was expanding the rib cage and making the chest bigger and whatever
else.
And they often wouldn't use a lot of load with that.
Now he talks about using this Bosco chest lifting exercise instead of the pullover.
And again, I'm gonna have to explain this one to you because it's a it's a bit of a weird 1.
So he would be in a squat position and he would have the bar.
So the the bar would be in the squat, Jack.
OK, so now he wouldn't put the bar on his back, but you would have the the bar set up.
And then what he would do is have his arms, his hands placed on the bar behind him.
So he's standing in front of the bar and then lean back until he sorry, lean forwards until he felt
the stretch.
And then he would push into the bar and and he said his chest would lift as he's pushing into the
bar.
And he would do these 20 sort of isometric pushes down into the bar and lifting his chest each time.
Now, I don't know if, if you get anything out of that.
I tried to visualize this and think about what this is doing.
And I, I didn't come up with anything, but I'll, I'll leave it to you in a moment.
So we're almost done.
Then we've got, where were we after our chest lifting exercise?
We've got a, a, what he called a pull up with a barbell.
Now this is essentially a, like an upright row.
So he's pulling the row the, the bar up to chin height and then back down.
So kind of what we would just call an upright row now and then side bends for the dumbbell, which
didn't really continue on past early silver era.
We talked about this in in the last few episodes.
They did exist up until sort of, I guess around the 50s, early 50s.
And then they sort of fell out of fashion after that.
But he was still doing them.
And he did that for sort of 10.
And then he finished.
I had two more.
Then he did a leg press, which would have been, I suspect with a barbell balanced on his feet most
likely.
I'm not sure if he had a machine at that point in time.
Most people didn't and he did.
He didn't actually mention repetitions, but he he did say that it wasn't overly heavy.
So I'm assuming probably 1520 repetitions like the exercises prior.
And then he concluded with a Bosco Zotman exercise.
Now people might be familiar with the Zotman curl.
We haven't talked about this.
I don't believe so.
The Zopman curls are a type of of, of biceps dumbbell curl.
And essentially for people who aren't familiar with it, what you would do is you would stand
normally you'd have two dumbbells, so a dumbbell on each side in each hand, and you would alternate.
So one hand would come up and you'd be coming up in a supinated position, a supinated wrist
position.
And then when you get to the top, you would pronate while the other hand comes up in a supernative
position.
So you're kind of doing, I guess, a supinated concentric and then a pronated eccentric.
Now this would be done quite it would, I don't know if you've seen videos of people doing this,
Chris, but it was like quite rhythmic.
It is sort of this like circular flowing type exercise.
And he would do 40 repetitions with it.
Now, often people you hear, you see people doing Zotman curls today.
They don't particularly look the way these guys used to do it.
Again, it very much looked like this kind of almost like a a dance.
It's a very rhythmic type exercise.
But let me finish that.
There's a few novel exercises.
What's standing out to you?
OK, so trying to think about this logically.
So we've got the the overhead squat as a warm up.
OK, fine.
We've also got the the heavy squat kind of or the 20 Rep Max or the 10 Rep Max with 20 reps or
however they're doing it, breathing squats, whatever.
And then obviously what the leg press.
So that's a lot of squat pattern in there, but obviously only single sets per exercise.
So there's like a a warm up style overhead squat and then there's a proper squat session and then
there's a leg press finishing off.
I mean, very much a duplication from my point of view really.
And then we've got the same thing really with the curls.
So we've got 3 curl variations as well.
Got the starting barbell curl, got the swing bar curl, and then we've got the Zotman curl at the
end.
So again and, and, and maybe there's a little bit of difference there, but I don't think there's a
lot of difference.
So straight away I've got what looks like three sets of a basic squat pattern and then three sets of
a basic kind of standing curl pattern with a little bit of variation.
Not very much in any of the in either of those situations.
So I'm seeing here something that I don't like, and I've been very vocal about saying that I don't
like.
This is when people vary stuff, but they're not actually varying anything important.
So this is the appearance of variety without the actual reality of bio mechanical variety.
So straightaway I'm he's getting on my wrong side because he's doing something I don't like seeing,
which is varying something for the sake of appearances rather than for the sake of actual
differences.
Now, to play devil's advocate for one moment, then I understand what you're saying with the curls.
I understand they guess you could have very easily selected a reverse curl or you know, the the
Stopman curl he's doing is it's not the most efficient way of doing that.
But when it comes to the quads, assuming he didn't have access to iron boots, then he was quite
limited with what he could do for quads, right?
And one thing that I actually do like doing in my own programming is I'm not against giving someone
effectively 2 exercises that are the same.
Like here we've got the squat and the leg press, it's the same basically.
I'm not against giving them both of those exercises for a single set as opposed to giving them two
sets of one of those, because I do find that single set effect someone's going to perform better
from a motivational standpoint than doing 2 sets of the same exercise.
And I think that's probably fair where you're talking about machine exercises.
I think where you're talking about requiring set up time for things like squats, I think the
argument goes away because you're going to have so much warm up and prep and getting ready and
making sure everything's all right before you do the actual work set that you'd lose an enormous
amount of that energy and motivation that you would get if you were just doing machine for single
sets in single set for machines.
I totally agree with you.
If you've got 2 machines that do broadly the same thing, then you can mentally get yourself in a
place where you treat them as separate things and fantastic.
But this is where we're setting up overhead squats and then actual squats and then leg presses where
you're balancing a bar with on your feet.
I think you're losing a lot by doing that.
Those three set, yeah.
Yeah, I mean arguably the 20 Rep squat like you said, it's you know, potentially 10/15 Rep Max
weight might not be too much set up.
Sure.
Yeah, in general I agree with you especially.
Probably as though in his case because he probably doesn't have a squat rack.
Yeah, He may have been sort of what do you call that?
Is it a Steinbog squat where you, yes, get it up from the side?
Yeah.
So there's a lot of hard work in there that I think makes no sense to me at all.
Also, I'm not wild about his choice of the lateral delta exercise, middle delta exercise, which is
basically his upright row because again, he's using biceps in that exercise.
Why would you choose when you could literally just do lateral raises or dumbbell, you know?
From the point yeah, why are you adding yet?
More biceps work when you've already got 3 you know separate bison exercises in there so again, not
wild about that as a choice I think that makes very little sense the pressing exercise is fine no
complaints about that I'm not seeing any kind of lat work in here really I don't see any pull ups.
I don't see any rows.
The closest we've got to anything that trains the back is the deadlifting shrug.
Yeah, So and I'm, I'm happy to see a stiff leg in there and I'm happy to see a shroke in there
because those two things that tend to drop out in many of the bronze era programmes.
So ultimately or bronze and silver actually, we tend to lose that.
So I'm happy to see hamstrings working here.
I'm happy to see shrugs in there for the traps, but I'm not seeing any lat work in here at all.
But then, to be fair, I've criticized many silver era programs on that basis as well.
I like that deadlift show of exercise he's got in there and.
Again, with it being stiff leg and potentially from blocks, I think that can be a fantastic
bodybuilding movement.
You know, I think you're getting a lot of, again, if you're in a hurry and you've got limited
equipment, I think it's a fantastic option.
You know, I mean, really, if I've done kind of, I mean, before I kind of move on to something that I
think would do 90% of this with minimal time input.
I mean, just kind of look at this thing that you've described as a triceps exercise.
So just to be clear, he's not actually doing elbow extension, correct?
So it's actually a shoulder extension exercise.
So it's essentially starting with the easiest part of the motion when he's, if he's bending forwards
in a good morning type position and essentially his arm is downwards and it's at 90°.
And getting it moving from that 90° is really easy because essentially the external moment Tom at
that point is relatively small.
So it's the exercise getting harder and harder and harder as he goes to the end range of motion.
So triceps shoulder or long head of the triceps is a shoulder extensor, but it's best leverage is
overhead.
So it drops to 0 as you get to the 90° point.
And essentially that is where you're or just past that point where you're finishing.
So this isn't a triceps exercise.
This is going to be closer to a posterior del and thoracic latex size really.
So this is the closest thing you're going to get to a Latex size in that program and it's definitely
not a triceps exercise.
Triceps exercise will be if the hardest part of the exercise was overhead in a like pullover type
position.
So I guess his, whatever he's replaced, I don't, I actually don't think the exercise that he's
replacing a pullover with is is actually a pullover.
I think it's something completely different.
But yeah, the the exercise selection here makes it very difficult to analyse.
I'm kind of going around in circles trying to figure out what actually this program is doing.
Yeah, because even what you said there like OK, is he, is he actually potentially getting some light
work then with his?
Yeah, well that's why I'm straight away I'm contradicting myself because I'm like, well, I saw no
light work and now I'm realising the triceps exercise is actually light work.
Yeah.
And then if I look hard enough at this chest lifting, breathing exercise, maybe I'll find something
in there.
Yeah, who knows?
I know.
I was honestly when I was looking that I'm like, what?
What are we getting?
This must be something we're getting but.
It looks a little bit like it might be a slightly wider grip than shoulder flexion.
So outside of the social plane, but it's not transverse plane.
So it's not out here.
It's somewhere down here I think from what you described to.
Yeah.
But that would kind of make it like a, a PEC exercise, a clavicular PEC exercise probably, which
fits the description in this particular case.
Although obviously as we've seen where there's something placement description isn't necessarily a
guarantee.
So it looks to me like it's just another press really, or a clavicular press.
So, you know, in that sense, it fits with the, the, you know, it adds on to the pressing volume that
he's got, which is not, you know, very much.
So I'm struggling really to get my head around this as a, as a thing.
There's lots of stuff I don't like about it, but there's a couple of things that I really do like.
Honestly, I would, I would constrain this right down.
I would cut this right back if I was, if he was writing this, you know, today with the same
equipment limitations, I would be like, obviously the we both think the deadlift and shrug variation
is a fantastic option.
But yeah, stiff legs I think is a fantastic choice.
If you've got nothing more than a barbell, obviously shrug.
If you can do that at the same time, OK.
If you can't, then you can do it separately.
Squats, obviously you're going to be doing that because there's no real other choice.
In in in in in terms of training the lower body hip and knee extension function.
Without that, obviously he's got a bench so he can do bench presses.
If he genuinely doesn't have access to a pull up bar then OK, so pulling is going to be difficult,
but he could do some row variation.
Yeah, it is interesting that he doesn't have a row and they obviously that was very commonly done.
So I wonder wonder what they're.
Just do a bent over row.
I hate those.
But you could do a bent over row.
You could set up the bench to do a.
If you put the bench on blocks you can do a horizontal row from the floor and you can do that size
tool plane.
You can do more wide.
Couldn't get a wide grip version as well.
This is so much wasted, so many wasted exercises here with the I mean you.
Obviously do curls with the bike.
Yeah, just so much ridiculous biceps work that's probably not doing very much.
And then a bunch of strange things that don't make a lot of sense.
Yeah, I think you could squat, deadlift, bench press and a row and you'd have and the shrug,
obviously.
And I think you'd have a really solid exercise routine and five exercises that's doing almost
everything that he's got here.
Yeah, yeah, that's valid.
I mean, really, when we've got access to machines, we start putting in stuff like, I mean, OK, so he
could technically do a calf raise, He could stand with a barbell and he could do a calf raise, you
know, not nice, but he could do that.
But generally speaking, when we start adding in machines, we're getting stuff like wrecked fam,
we're getting better hamstrings work, we're getting more options in terms of cables and start moving
activation around between regions.
So we get the variety that he's struggling to get.
But even in the context of even in the context of the equipment that he's got available to him, I
think he's got a lot of fluff in here that doesn't really make any sense, got a lot of duplication
in here that doesn't make any sense.
And ultimately, you could do a better job with five exercises in mind.
What I do like about it, I do like the single sets and I do like the fact that when he is training a
muscle group with more than one set, he's choosing to do an additional exercise for that instead of
an additional set.
I do like that.
I do like that most of this is sort of in that 8 to 10 repetition range.
Yes, there's some that go up to 15.
Some of them even go up to 20.
I actually quite like the fact that he's not wed to just one of those repetitions because that's
where I would choose to train as well.
If there's some exercise where I know I don't need to do any additional warm upsets and I can do
instead of 8 instead of 6 or whatever, I'll do that.
And there's others where that's not feasible and I'll do instead of 10 or 12 or 15 or whatever it
might be.
So I think that's convenient.
But, and you know, 12 exercises, I think a lot of people do quite well with about 12 exercises in a
workout.
Nothing magical though about.
No, it's not magical.
Seven of them are duplications.
No, I know, I know.
But as a as a outline of a training program, if you took out the exercises and you changed the
exercises up, the actual foundational outline I think is quite good.
But yes, the exercise selection leaves a fair bit wanting, doesn't it?
It does.
It does.
So moving on, we're talking about fatigue, which we have talked about multiple times.
We're talking about from a different perspective today.
We are because there is a study that came out at the end of last year that I've only recently sort
of had the time to go through and I'm very excited to read it.
Just to set the context, there's obviously a couple of things I want to say about context, but the
first thing I want to say about context here is that this is a rodent study.
So if you're listening to this and you think that rodent studies aren't relevant, you can stop
listening.
In fact, you probably shouldn't be listening to this podcast at all.
But you know, anyway, if you generally think that these aren't interesting or that they're of some
kind of minor relevance in comparison with our long term human studies, then again, as I say, you
can stop listening.
But this is a rodent study that has attempted to solve a fundamental problem about hypertroy.
It's asking a fundamental question.
It's not tinkering around the edges.
It's not asking kind of questions that aren't striking at the heart of how hypertrophy actually
happens.
It's going right to the very centre of the questions that are interested and it's saying how does
this actually work if I control all of these other variables that I'm, you know, kind of interested
in?
Now, this is only very rarely done.
So let me just kind of give a little bit of very quick background to the situation, but essentially
we've got, I think I think this is the third in a series of really important studies that have
actually tried to get, you know, fundamental information about how hypertrophy works.
The first study is one that I'm always talking about.
It's an incredibly important study.
It's called increased hypertrophic response with increased mechanical load in skeletal muscles
receiving ident identical activity patterns.
That was published in 2016.
And it's one of the fundamental studies behind why I keep pointing out to people that force
velocity, our relationship is the underlying principle behind mechanical tension that drives
hypertrophy and muscular contractions.
Because what it did was it had two groups of rodents, one that trained with isometrics and one that
trained with an identical amount of activation but with high velocity contractions.
So isokinetics.
So essentially you're using electrical stimulation to make sure that muscle activation is absolutely
maximal and identical in all of the contractions that you're doing in the training program.
And you match that activation between the two groups.
The only difference is the force that the fibres produced because of the force velocity
relationship.
And what they found was that the high force, the isometric group achieved quite a lot of
hypertrophy, whereas the the high velocity group achieved almost no hypertrophy.
But fibre type shifting was identical in both of those two groups.
And that's really, really important because what it shows you is that mechanical tension from the
forced velocity relationship is driving the hypertrophic response, the actual fibre growth, single
fibre growth, whereas activation is driving fibre type shifting.
So I keep telling people calcium ions, Dr. fibre type shifting.
Well, there's another kind of sort of item in the list of things that adds to that conclusion.
So this was a really, really fundamental, I think this is the fundamental hypertrophy study because
it shows you that not only is hypertrophy a single fibre phenomenon, but it's actually driven by
things that are happening inside fibre relating obviously to the forced loss relationship, the
binding of actin and myosin.
So massively, massively important study, not just another rodent study, but possibly the rodent
study when it comes to hyper second study then is the volume study.
So this is like exactly the same idea.
You electrically stimulate muscles and rodents for a period of a couple of weeks.
And what you're doing now is you're just testing whether or not you're getting the same kind of
hypertrophy with different contraction modes.
And essentially this study showed that you could do essentially the same volume of contractions in
different contraction modes and get exactly the same muscle growth.
That is the studies that was published in 2017, that studies called effects of contraction mode and
stimulation frequency on electrical stimulation induced skeletal muscle hypertrophy.
Really, really important study, basically telling us that contraction mode doesn't really matter if
you get the same kind of talk time integrals.
Now I would argue that your eccentrics are going to give you more psychomagenesis in that context
and your isometrics and context going to give you more my fibrilla addition in that context.
But fundamentally the total muscle volume growth is going to be the same in those cases.
So another really, really critical study for understanding exactly how hypertrophy is happening.
And this final study in the three is 1 as I say that was published just at the end of last year.
And this study is basically looking at how fatigue modifies that dose response relationship.
So it's called effects of Repetition duration on Skeletal Muscle Hypertrophy in a Rat Model of
Resistance exercise published just this year, Although as I say, technically it was available right
at the back end of 2025.
Now, that was my context for the literature.
So if you're interested in this from an exercise science point of view and history of exercise
science, and the longer I do this job and the longer I think about this stuff and the older I get,
the more I become interested in how excise science changes over time and the history of this
process.
That's just, I guess, a kind of a byproduct of just being here a long time.
So the other context though, is what are we actually talking about with this study?
So I'll get into the details and I'll explain what the study did in a moment.
But I just want to again put a kind of notice at the top of this section.
Like I put a notice at the beginning of the last section to say, you know, if you're interested, if
you don't think rodent studies are important, then you can leave at this point.
I'm going to make the notice that if you are listening to what I'm saying over the next 1020 minutes
and you start to think that I'm talking about time under tension or doing repetitions with different
speeds so slowing down the repetition, then you aren't understanding what I'm saying.
This is not about, I know the title says repetition duration.
This is not about repetition duration.
I'll explain why that isn't the moment.
But fundamentally what we're talking about here is the negative effect of fatigue mechanisms on
hypertrophic stimulus that they're experiencing because of the reduction of mechanical tension that
those fatigue mechanisms create.
So that is the essence of this investigation.
It's saying if I have identical talk time intervals, but within those talk time intervals some of
the groups are experiencing fatigue mechanisms, do I end up with the same hypertrophy or do I end up
with different hypertrophy?
Is it essentially affected by the presence of those calcium ion fatigue mechanisms?
But we'll get into that shortly.
So what did the study actually do?
Well, basically they had three different groups of rodents training for four weeks, and they did
electrically stimulated contraction training, which means that you're getting maximal or the
equivalent of maximal recruitment.
So you can imagine that in a human situation, this would be like doing maximum voluntary isometric
contractions three times a week for four weeks, or probably longer in the case of humans, because we
tend to need much longer studies to get the same level of statistical significance that we were
getting wrote.
So you can imagine if you did this in a human trial, you'd be looking at 8 weeks, probably 3 * a
week training maximal isometric contractions.
And they have three training groups and they all aimed to produce the same talk time integrals,
which is essentially like saying you're getting the same amount of force over time or area under the
curve that forces generating.
And one group did.
Just to be clear, all groups are training with sets of 10 contractions, 10 isometric contractions,
one group's training with one second duration contractions, one group's training with three second
duration contractions, and a third group is training with 9 second duration contractions.
Remember, these are all maximal isometric contractions with electrical stimulation.
So you're kind of hitting the muscle as if it were a stimulating step kind of context in the sort of
strength training situation to keep force deep talk time intervals the same.
The one second contraction group is training with nine sets, The three second contraction group is
training with five sets, and the nine second contraction group is training with three sets.
Because if you think about it, if they're all doing 10 contractions per set and they're taking 7
seconds of rest between contractions, they're all taking these sort of different duration
contractions for the same number of contractions per set.
Then your one second contraction group only has 10 total seconds of contraction.
So they need to do 9 sets.
Your 3 second group is getting 3 seconds of contraction per per, oh, I'm sorry, doing 3 second
contractions and they're doing ten of those.
So they get 30 second sets.
And your nine second contraction group obviously is getting 90 seconds across the whole set.
And so they only need to do a far fewer number of sets.
So what you're doing is you're essentially experiencing an enormous amount of fatigue in your nine
second congestion group and very little fatigue in your one second contraction group on each set by
set basis.
And given that you're doing 3 minutes of rest between sets, it really kind of allows your one second
group to get a lot of rest and avoid accumulating fatigue, whereas your nine second group is really
suffering quite a lot.
Just kind of pause there and check with Jake that that is making sense to him before I carry on.
Yeah, it is.
I'm trying to think if there's anything that needs clarification, but I think that's fairly
straightforward.
It's interesting.
There were 7 seconds between repetitions.
That's that's quite a long time or between those contractions.
Yeah, exactly.
And that that really kind of allows us to see that metabolite accumulation is probably not going to
be a major problem in these situations because obviously metabolites are clear really, really
quickly.
So if you allow that rest period, like with clusters, if you give a cluster set scenario and you're
giving 10 seconds maybe between repetitions, that gives you a lot of time to clear metabolites.
You know, whereas other mechan and spinal CNFT actually, whereas a lot of other mechanisms like the
calciumine stuff is just not going to be able to do anything in that short period of time.
Yeah.
Now the the rest periods, the contraction duration, all of that is similar to what we would see with
humans, Yeah, like doing a three second or nine second isometric or taking 3 minutes off between
sets or doing sets of 10.
That would be fairly standard for us to do a second contraction in a mouse compared to a second
contraction in a human.
Is that relatively equivalent?
Not really.
So generally speaking, rodents have much more oxidative muscle fibers than we do, so they are going
to clear fatigue much more successfully.
But equally we are dealing with electrical stimulation here, so you are dealing with pushing things
up to the absolute maximal level.
So you are getting into territory that a rodent typically wouldn't get into.
So the swings and roundabouts really.
But yeah, generally speaking, the smaller the animal, the more oxalated it's muscle fibers and the
faster it's going to be able to deal with fatiguing mechanism.
So we've got these three training groups and essentially they're aiming to produce, and they did
actually produce pretty much identical talk time integrals, but the longer the contraction duration,
the longer the total time and the lower the average torque.
So essentially you're reducing the amount of torque that you're getting on average in any given
contraction.
And to compensate for that, you have to do a lot more contractions.
So essentially you're getting a lot more actual excise time with maximal activation, but because of
the force being lower in each of the muscle fibers that are working, you're having to do that in
order to match the total talk time interval of the that one second contraction group.
So what I'm saying here is that your one second contraction group is getting the same talk time
integral in a much shorter period of time than your nine second contraction group.
Yeah.
Yeah.
And this really strikes at the heart of some of the assumptions in some of the competing models that
are starting to be formed for how Hypertroy works, because some people are arguing that talk time
integral is what determines Hypertroy in a strength training context.
So literally all of the reps in a strength training set they think are stimulating.
So if I do a 30 Rep Max, they think all of those repetitions are somehow stimulating.
And that what you're then doing is you're saying, you know, you're just apportioning the stimulus
across the entirety of the set and you Add all of that up and it somehow magically gets to the same
stimulus that A10 Rep Max would get to or A5 Rep Max would get to.
What we're seeing is that this study here by showing that the hypertrophy is actually very different
between these three groups.
It's really high in the one second contraction group, it's lower in the three second contraction
group and it's very, very low in the nine second contraction group.
What it's showing is that this talk time integral does not determine hypertrophy of a strength
training kind of workout or set.
If you get if you allow the fibres to produce higher forces and get your talk time integral mainly
through force and not through time, then you get a strong hypertrophic response.
If you try and compensate for your reduced force because of the reduced mechanical tension, you're
going to end up and then obviously compensate for that by doing a longer duration of repetitions,
you actually get a worse effect.
So put another way, if I translate this to a human strength training context, if you do a, if you do
three sets of, say, I don't know, 8 Rep Max, and you say leave 3 to 5 minutes between each of those
sets, then you're going to get a strong hypertrophic response from that three sets of eight.
You'll of course see a little bit of fatigue towards the end of each set and you'll see a little bit
of more fatigue from set two to set 3, But fundamentally, you're getting a pretty strong
hypertrophic response.
In contrast, if you did that as a drop set and you did three sets of eight, but you had to drop the
load going from set one to set two to set 3 because you're leaving no rest period between those
things.
Essentially what you're going to get in that scenario is much, much reduced hypertrophic stimulus
because of the fatigue mechanisms that are building up inside the Moss fibers.
And actually in human context in the central nervous system.
Because of course in this rodent model, we are not allowing the central nervous system to get
involved in the fatigue processes.
But in obviously a human scenario, we would see that essentially you are reducing the hypertrophic
stimulus that those additional drops are producing in comparison with the three straight sets.
So this is really, really important rodent study because it's showing us really clearly that fatigue
mechanism is having a negative impact on hypertrophy.
And that's for me the critical part of this study because I've been trying to educate people about
the negative effects of fatigue for a very long time now in terms of hypertrophic scenarios.
And while I think most people follow my logic, there are a kind of a a group of hypertrophy
researchers and their influencers who are really resisting that and are essentially trying to argue
it doesn't happen.
I think this is a extremely solid rodent study.
Like I said, it's probably one of the three great rodent studies that is pushing to demonstrate that
hyper in a way that hypertroid researchers just can't ignore anyone.
So you made a comment when you're contrasting it to what we would see in humans who would be doing
something similar.
And you mentioned that obviously in in a human context, there's going to be central nervous system
fatigue, which we're not seeing in this study, right.
And exactly.
So when you do something like a drop set that you've just explained, then obviously there's going to
be a central nervous system fatigue and that's going to cause a reduction in Modi and recruitment.
Now in this scenario with the rodent study, there's not actually reduction in Modi and recruitment
that's occurring and yet there's still in ministry returns on hypertrophy.
Yep.
So basically all fatigue mechanisms with the exception of a disruption and coordination which is an
artefact.
All all fatigue mechanisms are trying to do the same thing.
Their purpose is identical and that is to protect the nosa fibres from running out of ATP.
And that's why a lot of people who come at fatigue mechanisms expecting to see fatigue being created
by a loss of energy availability, they get unravelled in how fatigue works very quickly and they get
confused because that's the opposite of what fatigue is doing.
Fatigue is stopping you getting to that point.
Fatigue is not caused by a loss of energy availability.
Fatigue is actually stopping you getting to the point where you're losing energy availability
released at the ATP level.
You can lose energy availability at the glycogen level.
That's totally doable, right?
You're never going to lose it at the ATP level.
So ultimately, CNFT mechanisms are stopping you activating the fibre in the 1st place, whether
they're at the superspinal or spinal levels, they just stop you activating the fibre.
And that basically means that you don't use any ATP because the fibre's not activated.
You can't really use ATP very effectively unless the fibre's activated calcium I related feed
mechanisms are like the next link in the chain.
If the fibre is activated, then you can either switch it off at the cell membrane level with cell
membrane and kind of losses of excitability.
And that can happen for a number of reasons.
But primarily I think the main reason is it gets damaged.
You can lose it at the electrochemical junction, the triadic junction, which is what is technically
referred to as excitation contraction coupling failure, or you could lose it at the sensitivity
level.
You can lose it from acting, losing sensitivity to the presence of calcium.
So you can lose the ability to respond to the presence of an activated fiber.
But again, by losing those, losing the ability to activate the internal part of the fiber, even
though there's an activation of the external part of the fiber means you can't create cross bridges,
you can't create, you can't use ATP.
And if you actually, if you stop the the flow earlier than that, you can actually stop excitation,
contraction coupling happening and that uses a lot of ATP.
So ultimately all of this stuff is really just stopping you from using ATP GDP.
Now the reason I'm setting this context is because if you use electrical stimulation and you just
kind of move everything one step down and you say, OK, we can't use CNFT mechanisms now, it doesn't
change anything.
It just means that now your calcium ion relative T mechanisms, as I call them, are now going to be
entirely responsible for protecting you and they are just going to go to the Max in order to try and
make that happen.
You're just going to push them to the point when they do as much as they can't possibly do in order
to stop you running out of ATP.
So you're just magnifying the effect of calcium.
I'm related to fatigue.
So really from a kind of experimental design perspective, all that's going to be different is that
you are going to move the limiting factor one step down from the CNS to the calcium ion fatigue
mechanisms.
So what you couldn't?
So people are going Oh no no no, now this experiment is irrelevant.
You can't use this to translate to humans.
Yes you can, because the CNFT mechanisms do exactly what the calcium mechanisms are doing, except
one step up the chain.
They just stop you using the fibre.
The only thing that's going to differ is that because the fibre gets switched off in both cases, so
you're reducing tension in both cases, It doesn't matter.
The end result from a hypertrophy point of view is identical.
The end result from a muscle damage point of view is completely different.
So like if you're using obviously CNFT mechanisms to switch the fibers off, you're not going to get
the same post workout fatigue because you're not going to get the calcium influx.
If you were to use this study and say Oh well what was the muscle damage result, then you get a
completely different answer because your CNFT is protecting you not only from running out of ATP but
it's also protecting you from the calcium ion influx creating muscle damage after the workout.
So you wouldn't be able to use this study to say, well, how does post workout fatigue work?
Because you are not experiencing the same kind of stimulus for post workout fatigue.
If you haven't got any CNS fatigues, if you lose the access to CNS fatigues, then you are
essentially not protected as much as if you have still got those.
So, but from a hypertrophy or hypertrophy point of view, switching which part of the planet my brain
is in right now, whether I'm thinking in English or American English.
So depending on which kind of, yeah, depending on the question we're asking, if we're asking about
fatigue, then we can't really map this.
But if we're asking about hypertrophy, then we can map it perfectly because all is happening is that
the fibres are being switched off higher or lower in the sequence before they actually get a chance
to produce mechanical tension.
And it's the mechanical tension that's obviously stimulating hypertrophy.
Because that's what we talked about at the very beginning when I said, you know, there's been a
classic rodent study that we saw in 2016 that shows that tension is the driver of hypertrophy on a
single fibre level.
Your comment about CNS fatigue protecting you from the muscle damage, that's something we've
highlighted in the past where I've mentioned some of the ridiculous workouts we see in the golden
era with some of the insane amounts of volume.
In some ways, some of those very short rest periods and high repetitions are having a protective
effect because they're causing such a high amount of this CNS fatigue that it's mitigating at least
some of that damage than if the fatigue mechanisms weren't there.
Yeah, totally.
If you're out of breath or if your muscles are burning, then those two things are going to be using
RPE that you can't dedicate towards Central Motor Command.
So, yeah, I mean, I, I see this still.
I mean, I literally was in the gym yesterday and there was a guy training sitting next to me and he
was literally really breathing very, very hard during his sets.
You know, he was absolutely blowing like a train.
And that is going to be using RPE that he is not dedicating towards the motor unit agreement signal.
So it's going to reduce the number of activated fibres.
I mean, that has a negative effect on hypertrophy because you're not getting the fibres available to
train.
But of course it also then protects you because you're not getting the muscle damage.
So in both of these scenarios, if you do have CNS fatigue that's there and basically stopping the
activation compared to in this rodent study where the CNS fatigue wasn't interfering and then it was
more calcium modulated fatigue mechanisms in both of those.
If we were to actually able to look at muscle fiber hypertrophy, we're going to see that the
hypertrophy that the that group experienced reduction hypertrophy in that rodent study, it would be
coming from muscle fibers that would be higher up in the high threshold mode unit pool, wouldn't it?
They're going to be affected more so.
Correct.
So both CNS fatigue and or or all CNST mechanisms work top down.
So basically they start by reducing your access to the highest threshold mode units and they work
downwards.
And the purpose of that is to avoid the glycolytic fibres at the top end of the motor unit pool
being stripped to all their ATP.
So that's how it is designed to work.
Calcium, I'm related to the mechanisms inadvertently work in exactly the same way because they are
going to be most prevalent in fibres with minimal mitochondria because mitochondria are the first
line of defence against calcium and accumulation.
So if you've got fibres at the top end of the motion pool in there being activated by electrical
stimulation, then the mitochondria are going to give up very quickly in those fibres because there
aren't very many of them and they're weaker than the mitochondria in the low and the slow twitch
fibers that low threshold make change.
And so ultimately they're going to experience those calcium I'm relative D mechanisms very, very
rapidly.
So irrespective of whether you're doing this with this is what I'm saying from a like system point
of view, fatigues and calcium, I'm read these are doing pretty much.
The same, the same function, yeah.
As far as the most, as long as we're talking about hypertrophy and not muscle damage, then they are
literally doing exactly the same thing.
So from this study's point of view where people are going to be like, Oh, well, that's electrical
stimulation, I can ignore it.
Your own study, I can ignore it.
I'm like, you don't understand how fatigue mechanisms work.
If you actually work through the things that are the processes that are working in this situation,
you can actually just map this perfectly across something like drop sets in humans.
Yeah, yeah.
So what is?
But what you can't do, and just coming back to the contextual remark I made at the beginning of this
section, you cannot say, oh, so this is like saying that I shouldn't do slow repetitions, I
shouldn't slow down my Rep.
No, if you slow down your Rep in a strength training set, you are reducing motin improvement to do
that.
That's the only way we've got of doing that action.
If you say to me, well I'm going to slow down my repetition and do like 4 second lifting phases, I'm
like the only way you can do that is by reducing your effort level, which is reducing recruitment
and you're changing the recruitment.
That's the muscle fires are experiencing now.
You're not, you're not comparing like with like anymore.
The two scenarios are totally different.
So why is someone who's just listened to explain this study and they might be asking, well, hang on,
I'm not doing isometrics.
I'm not doing 9 second isometrics and doing 10 repetitions.
Probably not even doing job sets either.
Yes.
So how is this relevant?
Yeah, So what it also tells us is that any Rep that's done with a maximum level of effort and they
maximum.
Sorry.
In this stimulating Rep model, we say that any repetition that's done with Max recruitment and Max
and high mechanical tension is a stimulating Rep.
Now you can drop one level down from that.
So the beginning, a stimulating Rep is high recruitment plus high mechanical tension.
That's the axiomatic basis of stimulating Rep theory.
You can't have transverse hypertrophy increase in my affable number without both high recruitment
and high mechanic retention drop down one level.
What does that mean in practice?
It means that you need a high level of effort to map to high levels of recruitment and also a high
and a slow movement velocity to map to a high mechanic retention.
OK, so those are our two practical implications.
Why can't we just say that all the time?
Why can't I just say that a stimulating Rep is high effort plus slow movement velocity?
I can't say it for two reasons.
One, I can't say it because a high level of effort doesn't always mean maximum levels of motor unit
recruitment.
Because I can have a high effort that comes from other sources of RPEI can feel RPE if I'm breathing
hard like the gentleman sitting next to me in the gym yesterday.
I can feel RPE if I've got metabolite burning sensations in the muscles that we were talking about
with golden era bodybuilders.
So I can have sensations that are adding to my effort perception that don't actually give me the
high recruitment because they're chewing up RPE that I would use for recruitment if I had it
available, but I don't because I'm dedicating it to these sources of pain and suffering instead.
So I can't map high effort perfectly to motive equipment.
This goes back to a debate that has been going on a long time whereby every so often I say that, you
know, doing light loads to failure doesn't actually hit maximals of recruitment.
And I suddenly get all the screeches from the fitness influencers shouting, yes it does, yes it
does, yes it doesn't.
And I dig out all the data and I show people again and then they all go quiet and it's literally
this.
That's what's happening in that you've got an effort perception coming from something else that is
then pushing your pushing a discrepancy between Motine equipment levels and effort levels.
What we're seeing here is an identical situation on the tension side.
If I've got a slow velocity like an isometric contraction or the end of a strength training set, do
I automatically therefore also have a high level of mechanical tension in that single fibre?
No, I can have calcium, I'm relativity mechanisms that are reducing the tension inside the fibre and
now I can have a slow velocity without a high level of mechanical tension stimulating hypertrophy.
So what we're seeing then is that we've got our end goal here for stimulating rap theory, which is
high recruitment and high mechanical tension per fibre drop down one level and go.
Usually a high effort should map to a high level of recruitment, but it doesn't if you've got a
fatigue mechanism in the CNS.
And here again, we're doing the same thing, just one level down.
We're going OK.
Now slow movement velocity doesn't always map perfectly to a high level of mechanical tension on the
fiber level.
If I have calcium ion relative T mechanism, that's it.
That's that's the essence of what we're saying here today.
Yeah, in this study, that's a really good summary, I guess of what this adds to the narrative,
because you hear people say things like, oh, it's, it's all their hard sets.
I think that's the language they use.
It's, you know, how the many hard sets of one does.
And as you've just explained there and obviously there's other issues here with that terminology,
but a hard set is not equating for fatigue.
For for the purpose of people listening to the podcast, that was Jake responding to the expression
on my face.
So we've, we've acknowledged that there's an issue with recruitment if fatigue mechanisms are at
play, but we haven't generally acknowledged that there could be an issue here with mechanical
tension with fatigue mechanisms at play.
So that's really interesting that we're saying actually both of these two, I guess, variables that
we need, they're both impacted by fatigue mechanisms.
Correct.
Exactly.
And that then has huge implications for how we program strength training Now.
Again, anybody who's been following the work that I've been doing over the last few years on fatigue
will not be surprised by anything I'm about to say.
All we're doing is just integrating this new finding into the evidence base that shows that what
I've been saying is in fact a good map.
If one of my favorite examples, if you look at the dose response of hypertrophy to training volume,
you get a nonlinear curve.
That nonlinear curve is quite pronounced if we use the Schoenfeld metro analysis and we apply
natural logarithm to the data presented in that metro analysis.
What we see is that broadly speaking, you're getting maybe like 40%, I forget the number on top of
my head, maybe like 40%.
People can correct me.
I don't remember numbers off the top of my headlines and maybe like 60% if we do three sets.
So kind of going up relatively in small amounts from the 100% of a one sets stimulus.
But the point is it's non linear.
You're not getting, you know, kind of double the amount of hypertrophy by doing 2 sets compared to
one set.
It's very, very much reduced in that second set and again reduced even further for the third set and
again and again and again as you go increasing and it becomes pretty minimal after five sets or so,
how much extra you get.
So a very, very non linear kind of curve.
And I've published what I think the estimates are in various different places.
So don't listen to my numbers right now.
Look at the numbers that I've actually written on a chart when I've been thinking about it.
So the point here though, is that if we look at the E centric training literature, you don't get the
same dose response curve.
The dose response curve stops at around about three sets.
It kind of goes up and then it just kind of plateaus.
And what that's showing us is that in eccentric contractions where you're getting a tonne more
calcium and accumulation, your ability to actually continue stimulating hypertrophy later on in the
workout just tanks to almost zero.
Wonderful illustration of exactly what we've just been talking about in the last sort of 20-30
minutes or so that if you have, you know, chucked a load of calcium ions into our muscle fiber to an
extent that it's produced calcium relative D mechanisms, you're not going to get any more
hypertrophy in that workout no matter how much more work you do.
The same thing would then apply to doing a load of stretch position strength training before you
wanted to do something else.
So This is why I talk about exercise order being important.
If you're doing multiple exercises for the same muscle group, classic example being leg press and
the knee extension.
Most people are going to do the leg press and then do the knee extension.
That makes no sense because if you do the stretch position exercise first, you're going to have the
calcium and accumulation.
You're going to have the calcium and fatigue.
You're not going to get much more value out of the knee extension, which is a generally a contract
position exercise.
So again, mapping really well to excise order, you know, with the calcium ampeti mechanisms playing
a major role.
But fundamentally you can also then use it to explain the the basic dose response analysis.
Why do we get a non linear response?
It's because your latest sets have got some calcium and accumulation.
And again, do we then take measures to try and avoid that problem earlier on in the workout?
Do I do do I should I be training to failure on on every single one of my sets if I'm doing multiple
sets to failure?
Or should I actually give myself a Rep and reserve on that earlier set?
Interestingly, this kind of would push you if you were planning on doing different Rep ranges.
I mean one really interesting Rep progression model is to do 1 heavy slightly heavier set and follow
it up by a slightly lighter set.
That way round makes a lot more sense than doing the lighter set first.
It's not that the lightest set is giving you anything additional, but you're contrasting that to
starting with a lighter set and then doing.
The lighter set.
So like you can see two scenarios.
The person who does a heavy set and leaves one Rep reserve and then follows up with a back off set
with a lighter weight to fade it.
So let's say they do A6 or A7 Rep Max and leave A1 Rep and reserve and then they do a 12 Rep Max but
they train to failure.
That way around is way better than doing the 12 Rep Max to failure followed by 6 Max 7 Rep Max
leaving Rep reserve.
Because what we're doing there is we're aiming to minimize the calcium and accumulation earlier in
the workout so that we keep our single fiber tension higher for longer.
In the same way that I would say to somebody, don't gas yourself completely with some kind of really
tiring cardiovascularly demanding exercise the being of the workout and then crawl through the rest
of your workout.
You know, with 0 ability to produce motin at cumin because you're so that your RP is being chewed up
by the cardiovascular sensations.
In the same way we don't want to dump calcium ions into the mussifiers in the first set of a workout
and then try and somehow create a benefit from the same in the same muscle group in later sets.
It's just not going to happen.
That's literally what this rodent study is showing us.
You can't just ignore fatigue mechanisms and expect that you can get the same result from a set with
high effort and slow movement velocity.
It's just not going to happen.
So are there any other ways that you would be conscious of setting up a training routine to be
consistent with what you said there?
So you know, you've obviously mentioned it makes more sense to do the lower repetitions first.
And then if you're going to do a back off set, do it that way rather than starting with higher
repetitions and then going to lower.
You've mentioned using stretch positions 2nd and doing the short position first.
I would just quickly add to that.
I do personally tend to do squats before my leg extensions because I do my squats with very low
repetitions and with a stack or a leg extension, I have to do about 15 plaster repetitions.
So for me in that condition, I find it makes more sense to do do it in that order.
But it's going to depend on that person, right?
So, you know, there's always going to be variables that you may or may not be able to control and
there's going to be different things that that's going to affect.
So you need to be thinking for yourself in your own context, what's going to make the most sense
here?
What are the variables?
I guess might someone?
Yeah, you're, you're picking the lesser of two evils.
Yes, exactly.
That's it.
I was neither.
Neither of the scenarios is optimal, but you're just.
Picking exactly neither is ideal.
I could Jim pin it, but yeah.
Yeah.
So obviously if we kind of start from premise that something like a drop set is going to be about
the worst way of training, then by definition the opposite of that could be interesting to explore.
And clusters are essentially the opposite of doing a kind of rest, not a rest pause, sorry.
They're the opposite of doing a, a drop set type routine.
Obviously that cluster has to be, it has to be a heavy load cluster.
You can't just do clusters with a moderate load like a 10 rate Max and expect something interesting
to happen because you're not actually estimating that when you start.
So it has to be a heavy load clusters you have to be using A5 rate Max, but five rate Max weights
done with like single or double repetitions could be a really.
Interesting way of training once we understand that this these fatigue mechanisms are having really,
really meaningful effects on the reduced hypertrophy stimulus that we're getting.
So in, in that context, when we've talked about classes in the past, I think we've done at least
one, maybe 2 podcasts.
We've talked about them.
We've talked about the example of using like A5 Rep Max load, you do a single, maybe you wait 30
seconds or so between the repetitions.
And we've talked about it largely in the context of mitigating some of that more like spinal and
super spinal CNS fatigue.
Now based on what we're talking about here with calcium ion fatigue, would that change that that
sort of rest period between the cluster or what we've talked about there would still apply?
I think that in human scenarios of voluntary contractions, the CNS fatigues are going to be doing
most of the work.
I think that the reason we're seeing so much calcium I fatigue in this rodent study is simply
because there wasn't an ability to create it.
Yeah, but you would basically just trigger it to a higher level because it's far better for the body
to do it that way.
You don't want a lot of calcium I fatigue because you're going to suffer horrible consequences in
the post workout period if you do.
So I think honestly, we're still targeting CNS fatigues in a human perspective and spinal CNST
dissipates really quickly, super spinal fatigue and nonlinearly.
So you get a huge benefit as soon as you take your kind of weight off, you're immediately starting
to recover incredibly rapidly from the spinal CNST.
So I think really 1020 seconds, 30 seconds is an enormous amount of time from a spinal CNST point of
view, from a superspinal point of fatigue, superspinal fatigue point of view, you're really looking
for sensations.
And people ask me questions about this all the time.
And I'm like, are you living in your body?
Are you, are you actually aware of what you're experiencing?
Can you feel?
Can you detect your breathing rate?
Can you?
Yeah, you're getting.
This feedback to know.
This for yourself?
Yeah.
You should know this stuff like you.
You must be living in in your body.
You're not living somewhere else.
You're not a computer game Sprite.
You know, you must be able to detect this stuff, like feel it.
You know, if you're doing like squats, then you're going to find that you're going to need a lot
more rest between sets because you're going to be breathing hard.
You're going to have that blood lactate response that's going to provoke a cardiovascular response
after every single repetition.
If you're doing, you know, kind of biceps curls, not really, but you might be getting metabolite
accumulation there.
So you ought to be aware of that.
So you've got to be aware of the sensations and even if you're not getting those, but you're getting
some other disagreeable sensation, then be aware of that as well because that's probably not a good
exercise for you to do that particular thing.
Cluster protocol on what you're looking for is a cluster.
If you want to do clusters and experiment with them in this context, you need something where you
can comfortably do like heavy load singles or double s.
And then like what you're looking for is the any deciral sensations to die away over 10 seconds or
so, perfect.
And then do another repetition.
If you're in a scenario where it's uncomfortable, it's painful, it's giving you long duration, like
disagreeable sensations.
Like for me, I wouldn't be able to do this with squats.
I would be absolutely gassed after a handful of reps It just wouldn't work for me at all.
I think there'd be other scenarios where it work a lot better, but I think everybody's going to be
different, but fundamentals don't change.
Yeah, yeah, it's, it's very, it's going to be very exercise dependent.
You know, with a squat, the last thing I'd want to do is do that with an actual barbell squat, I
don't.
Know sure.
I'm trying to obviously talk about like pendulum squat.
Yeah, I mean, you can if you're skilled and you've got very good kind of set up with Iraq.
I mean, like when I was doing a lot of powerlifting task watching, I was very attuned to exactly
where my barbell was and where my wreck was.
And I could literally as lean forward very slightly and it would be on the pins.
Yeah.
Or you could like a mono lift or something like, you know, depending on the equipment you've got.
If you've got the access to this kind of stuff, then you know you can do it with a barbell.
But like if obviously you've got a pendulum squat or something or a hack squat or you've got the
system machines in place, it's a lot easier.
You don't have to worry about that like re racking process or anything like that but.
Same with the bench.
You know, I wouldn't want to do this with the bench press.
You could do with the chest press machine.
Yes, exactly.
So I think this is it's going to fit machines a lot better.
But again, maybe people are going to struggle to be able to do a heavy load to machines.
Most people are going to be working moderate loads with machines just because unless they've got Jim
pins or other ways of making the stack heavier, it's going to be very tricky for them to be working
in that zone.
So based off this study, it's to me, it sounds like the shorter intervals of a maximi stimulating
repetitions who can do more often the better.
So if we were to do say many sets of a single, I mean, I guess sort of like what we just said there
the cluster, but it sounds like potentially lower repetition maximi stimulating Rep sets for more
sets could be better than high repetition sets.
But ultimately that fits perfectly with just the like knowledge that we've gained over the last sort
of 5-10 years, which is that short rest periods aren't very clever for hypertrophy purposes.
I think what we're seeing here is another step in that direction of moving forward from the short
rest period data and saying not only are short rest periods between sets not very clever, but
allowing your set to drag on, you know, way past the point of being effective is not very clever
either.
So honestly, I don't think that this study changes anything for me because ultimately it just kind
of adds more weight to evidence to the argument that I've been making consistently for the last few
years.
What it does, I think, is push that idea right up into the hypertrophy researchers faces.
This is a hypertrophy study.
All of the studies that I've been working off the last kind of however many years have all been
fatigue Physiology studies.
And I just keep bringing the fatigue Physiology.
I put researchers just keep going.
I'm not interested, not interested, not interested.
This is now a hypertrophy study that's showing exactly the same thing.
And that's a game changer because now it's a study in there literature body that they're interested
in reading.
And it proves the point I've been making all along, which is that fatigue mechanisms are negative
fibre to be not positive.
Well, actually that maybe let me restate my my statement or question in in that term there.
So essentially what we want is as many of our maximally stimulating repetitions as possible to be
done in an UN fatigued state and so hang.
On a minute, hang on a minute.
So terminology.
So from my point of view, a stimulating Rep is high recruitment and high tension.
So what you just said there was technically not possible because if it's a stimulating Rep then it
must have automatically axiomatically high recruitment and high tension.
Yes, but there's a contain.
You want all of your high effort, slow velocity reps to be done in low states of fatigue.
Well, so if we were to say a set of 5 SA set of five, we're going to agree that that is all
maximally stimulating, but there's going to be more fatigue.
It's not like we're having an argument.
So, but this actually, this ties back to something that you pointed out before we jumped on the
podcast today, which is that this observation that you're now homing in on could actually explain
the study that we last did as a study review on this podcast.
Because we've only asked, this is only the second study that we've done a full review of, not that
we've done a full review, but.
This is only the great things about our podcast.
I occasionally remember things, and that was a study that actually I was quite interested in.
So I do remember that we covered my increasing decline into old age is becoming a meme on the
Internet.
People write to you, say you're forgetting stuff, and you can't remember what you're saying in the
middle of a sentence.
I'm like, yeah, I know.
That's what happens when you get old.
Yeah.
The last study we actually reviewed and the only other study that we reviewed on this podcast was
the study regarding heavy loads producing similar hypertrophy to moderate loads in a long term
strength training program in humans, which was radical because prior to that we'd never really got
anything heavier than about an 8 Rep Max ish.
So it was kind of really, really kind of important.
It also starts to indicate that, you know, maybe there is a possible benefit of heavy loads that
goes above and beyond that, just the number of stimulating reps.
And this study would fit perfectly into that category because as you rightly point out, if I'm doing
a 5 Rep Max or if I'm starting to do singles with five Rep maxes, you might actually get more
stimulating effect from doing that than doing sets of moderate loads to failure and getting
ostensibly what looks like 5 stimulating reps.
But the actual stimulus of those stimulating reps and inverted commas isn't actually as high as the
stimulation I'm getting from singles with heavier loads.
And this study is pushing us in that direction.
It's literally just fatigue mechanisms.
Yeah.
So it's interesting that the rhetoric is obviously that what's best for hypertrophy.
I mean most people nowadays will say anything from a set of 5 to 30.
But technically speaking, based on this, you could say, well, potentially even though sets of fewer
than 5 repetitions on a Rep by Rep basis, those repetitions might even be more stimulating compared
to a single Rep in that set of.
Five, yeah.
I mean, obviously the people who are saying that, you know, hypertrophy is identical between 5 and
30 reps as long as you're doing the same research to failure are abstract readers, aren't they?
I mean, they're not going any deeper than that.
Sure.
I mean, that is with the general narrative.
Yeah, sure.
You can find like probably 100, if not 1000 influencers on the Internet who say that, who have no
idea where that knowledge has come from.
You know, I mean, drop down a level and start kicking around the the mechanisms of how that works
and you start to see that there's got to be variability in there somewhere.
And indeed there is variability in that, as we did when we, as we talked about when we did the last
study review.
So but yeah, I mean, I think you could get to a point where you're like, is it worth trying to build
programs for hypertrophy around the idea of doing heavy singles with fibre at maxes or heavy double
s with fibre at maxes?
I think there's definitely something worth exploring in that.
I personally, I think you're going to lose something on the progressive overload side and the
motivation side.
But if you're able to, like we you, you actually wrote a program a while back where you had an AB
split and one of the workouts was progressive overload based where you had an actual Rep Max that
you were trying to push forward.
And the other workout was a cluster workout where you have any interest in actually pushing
everything forward.
You're just getting volume in for that protocol and that could be awesome in this context of what
we're talking about here today because you're getting the progressive overload and pushing things
forwards and you're getting the feedback that you're making progress.
But at the same time, you're actually getting this very what could be a very elegant way of
maximizing the hypertrophic stimulus in a workout.
And also incidentally, I mean this has been not really highlighted as we've gone through this, I'd
have mentioned it, if you minimize calcium relative fatigue during a workout, that minimizes post
workout T as well.
So if you go into a workout going, I want to get the maximum stimulus in each stimulating wrap.
So we're going to end up having to grade stimulating wraps at this point.
But if I want to get that automatically minimizes your post workout T.
Yeah.
I mean, for quite a long time I thought that almost probably the best way to train fibrotrophy would
be largely what a lot of power lifters do, but just change the excise selection.
You know, you talked about a Hepburn method with Robin on your other podcast and something like
that.
You know, you're getting very stimulating repetitions.
You're doing your sets of 234 repetitions with A56 Max Rep load.
It can kind of makes a lot of sense, doesn't it?
Yeah, I think it does.
I mean, I think it starts to make higher numbers of exercises challenging.
It does and that's why I tend to combine them.
So I often will do multi sets on one exercise for muscle where we might do fewer than 5 repetitions.
And then so it might be say 2 sets of of I think one of my groups at the moment we're doing 2 sets
of three to four repetitions.
And then the second exercise we're doing a single set with a set of 10.
So instead of that back off set for that same exercise, we're getting in a different exercise and
kind of doing that back off set idea, start with a different exercise and said, but you know, to
your point, it does become challenging if you're having to set up very heavy loads, you're having to
do warm up sets.
It is.
It's hard to justify doing that for a single set of very low repetitions.
But that is, you know, certainly something I think that could be experimented with.
I mean, the thing about the, I think about the science based lifting community is that they are
generally quite open minded and curious and they are happy to experiment with all kinds of
interesting ideas.
And it'll be interesting to see if they are able to experiment this and take in directions that
produce this interesting results.
And one of the interesting things that comes out to their experimentations is that they very quickly
start to arrive at practical ways of doing things because they're inventing on the fly of how to
make something happen.
So very quickly you get from, you know, like a year ago or two years ago, the availability of
options for stabilization during strength training exercises with cables was almost non existent.
You literally, I mean, like, I still go in the gym and I see some poor guy trying to do some
exercise with a cable and he's got his feet on the ground.
And that is the only point of stability he's got between him and the cable that he's trying to do
some kind of, you know, shoulder exercise with.
And of course, the load that he's able to move is just tiny because these feet to the only point of
contact with any sort of external surface.
So but now you see people on TikTok with all kinds of elaborate stabilization pieces of equipment
that have even not just pieces of equipment that they've kind of made themselves, but they're
actually now available to them.
They can buy.
So in a space for a very short period of time, we've seen some incredibly fast movement in improving
stability and therefore increasing motive equipment in specific situations.
So I think it's a lot of people give the science based lifting community a lot of criticism and I
think they just don't understand what they're trying to do.
I think they, they think from looking outside because bodybuilding has over the last sort of 30-40
years and this is obviously post Silvia area, but in the last sort of 30-40 years bodybuilding has
developed very strong kind of group membership trends.
So it has very strong trends and conventions around the kind of clothes people wear, the kind of
training that people do, the kind of language that people do and how they describe things, how they
talk about set, how they talk about reps, how they talk about what they're doing before and after
the gym.
There's lots of very strong group membership type trends.
And so when those people look at the science based lifting community, they expect to see the same
thing.
They look at them and they go, where are your trends?
Where are your kind of language, kind of habitual usages?
What, what am I expecting to see?
And those do exist, but that's not really what the community is trying to do as a base kind of
purpose.
Their purpose really is experimental.
That's what they are trying.
That's the thing that actually gets them thinking and going to the gym and doing stuff.
And it's not just belonging to a group and going and doing the sets and the reps and what have you.
It's actually creating new ways of doing things and solving problems based on an understanding of
how physiologically muscles are actually responding to exercise.
So I think that when people criticize that group, they're criticizing it from a fundamental
misunderstanding of what they're trying to do.
I'm not kind of like trying to say that I'm, you know, defending them as a like a group.
I'm just saying people are misunderstanding how they're thinking.
Yeah, they they feel like symbolic arguments against the community.
I don't entirely understand them all of the time because usually it's rooted in this sort of idea
of, well, no one ever used to do that.
But a lot of the time people did used to do that.
If you go far enough back.
And you know, one of the my favorite criticisms is at the moment, you know, a lot of people are
criticizing the use of stability devices like seatbelts.
And they say how stupid to use a seat belt or a machine and if it's stability purposes.
But you know, I've shared this online, like this photos of Dredge Park.
Any people to sit on him, literally hang off him in machines, in lap pull downs for stability.
It's like, well, you know, you don't, you don't see science based lifters walking around, go until
that pull down, get some to sit in the lap.
They'd be made fun of today.
But Dredge Park was doing this, you know, 75 years ago.
So it's, it's an odd argument to be like, oh, you know, this is just a, a new invention and it's a
TikTok phase or whatever.
Well, no, actually, the best bodybuilders before anabolics were all aware that stability mattered.
And you know these variables that people are trying to problem solve now matter.
But that point you just made that it's a phase, it's a TikTok phase that again, actually is, is, is,
is is starting from the point of view of a settled, established group with its own existing habits
and usages that have solidified.
The science based community is not trying to really do that.
The science based lifting community is actually rooted in experimental kind of practices.
It's like, it's like if somebody's looking at the science based lifting community from outside and
they're seeing everything changing all the time, they're not going to understand why that is.
If they start from their perspective, which is that a group should have established kind of
practices and ways of doing things that identify them as a group.
If they then look at the science based lifting reading, you know, why are these guys changing
everything all the time from week to week?
And that doesn't make any sense, boy.
It doesn't make sense because you don't understand what they're trying to do.
It's experimenting with stuff to try and figure things out and find ways of solving problems that
are presented to you by how Physiology actually works.
Physiology isn't changing, but the experimental side of it is how to match the practical processes
with that Physiology.
And that's what will look very strange from the outside because people are essentially, you've got a
marketplace of ideas of all these people trying to solve ways of gaining stability of, you know,
maximizing whatever thing they're trying to maximize.
It could be that they're trying to isolate or not isolate, but target one particular area of a
muscle.
And so they're moving the resistance profile around all over the place by doing things, you know,
they're changing, you know.
How the exercise is done in other aspects or whatever they're doing, but fundamentally it's
experimental and people who are coming from the perspective expecting a group to be settled are not
going to understand that.
It's just going to look weird.
And if you understand how groups work and how group dynamics work, it's really interesting to just
see those disconnects between people who are coming from the outside and looking at them going, I
don't understand this.
Well, yeah, you don't, because you are applying your template of what a group should look like to
this group, and they're not trying to achieve what your group is trying to achieve.
Before we conclude, I do need to ask and hopefully this isn't a can of worms like my question to you
last week was, but there might be people who've listened to this study that you've explained and and
now questioning, well, hang on, what do I do if I was performing isometrics, as we've talked in the
past about doing isometrics and we've talked about doing, you know, 5 to 10 seconds and we've just
said here that in this rodent study, the nine second isometric was far inferior to the shorter
isometric contractions.
Does that change the way someone should be performing isometrics?
So obviously the context in which the nine second isometrics is having a negative effect is when
you're doing 10 of them in a row.
Without spinal fatigue that's inhibiting.
And you haven't got the CNS fatigues that are kind of protecting you to a certain extent.
I mean, they're obviously going to have the same negative effect from my poetry point of view, but
they're not going to have a kind of post workout fatigue impact.
I mean, I've, I think I've been reasonably consistent in asking people to target 5 second
isometrics.
I don't think because that ultimately is the MVC kind of standard, it's the one we use for testing
maximum strength.
I think 3 to 5 seconds is pretty solid zone to get maximal force output.
I think that drifting higher than that towards 10 seconds is fine if you're not going to do lots and
lots of repetitions.
If you're going to do two or three repetitions, I think up to 10 seconds is probably OK, but
honestly, I would probably still personally prefer splitting that into two fives and doing double
the number of total conjections and doing them is 5 seconds.
Really it's the people who are still sort of going off the top end of 10 seconds and doing 22nd
isometrics that are going to be the people that are creating problems for themselves.
I mean, I think 10 seconds is probably still just about OK, as long as you're not doing a whole
bunch of them.
Some of these things bring back bad memories for me.
I've no OK, good.
Well, I've done like 32nd isometrics in the past.
Even when I was talking about Zotman curls, I remember back in the day we used to do, I think it was
100 Zotman curls.
We finished our arms workout.
Like man, some of the stupid stuff that that I've done or that people do today.
But there we go.
OK, 5 to 10 second isometrics.
Would you say when someone does an isometric is there you're not, you're not going to be getting Max
effort immediately, right?
Like there might be about a second, would you say until there's Max voluntary activation.
So if you're doing like say you were to do a three second isometric, it may be that's a little bit
in the short side.
Well, the voluntary activation depends on how you're approaching the isometric.
So in a in a bodybuilding context, generally speaking, we probably wouldn't go absolutely sort of
Max effort from the very start of the contraction.
You do see that in some sporting contexts where people kind of tried to produce Max effort from
straight out of the gate.
And that's a separate context.
But personally, if I'm kind of thinking about a programming or even attempting Max F isometrics,
there is no scenario in the world that I'm going to start with Max F straight allocate.
I'm just not going to do that.
It makes no sense from an injury prevention point of view.
So I'm going to start building force and it's going to take me a second or two to build to Max
force.
And that's just how I feel more comfortable doing them.
And I think unless you're an athlete in using an isometrics for a very specific athletic purpose, we
would always do them in that way.
So yeah, you are going to need a solid 5 seconds in that scenario and you're probably only going to
get three true Max effort, like Max mechanical tension kind of seconds in that scenario.
So again, if you want to push that up to seven, so you get full kind of five seconds, that would
make sense.
But again, you know, we're, we're, we're talking about somewhere between, you know, kind of 3 and 10
seconds.
We're not talking about anything longer than that.
I think that's the important thing.
Yeah, yeah.
Great.
OK.
So clusters, isometrics, lower repetition sets, potentially anything else we covered, I think that
was that are the key ones.
Reps in reserve.
Reserve.
Yep.
Excise order, stretch positions, I mean, ultimately none of this is new to anybody who's kind of
followed the FA look through the FAQ, followed what we've been saying and understands how calcium
I'm related fatigue works.
That's, that's really all it is.
And if you want to map it perfectly to humans, you're going to need to have the superspinal spinal
CSTS on as well.
But fundamentally, it doesn't really change that much.
OK, perfect.
Well, thank you guys for listening.
Join us again next week for probably not a study, Maybe, maybe not our third study review.
Who knows, It might be we don't know what's going to come out, but for another interesting topic.