Episode: 043 How to design the ultimate glute program
URL: https://open.spotify.com/episode/0rqEf0lk0UQ0kMwMhvxJoL
Published: 2026-03-16
================================================================================

Welcome back, everybody, to a new episode of Hypertrophy, Past and present.
And it feels like I'm two hours into recording this episode and we've already just started.
I've had every single technological woe you can imagine, but here we are.
Nothing can stop us.
And it's an important episode.
But before I say white important episode, Chris, I'm going to make sure you're still with me.
Are you still there?
I'm still here despite the two hours of technological worries and pains and difficulties.
So yes, we are both here and we are going to talk about some exciting stuff today.
Yes.
So before we jump into the topic for today and a silver area plan, and this is going to be a first
for the plan I talked about, I'm going to talk about a female plan.
So I've had a lot of people asking for one and here we go.
It's going to come.
But before we get into all that stuff, we are announcing that we are launching A certification
course.
So it's going to be a webinar series that's going to be registration is going to open in a few weeks
time.
We're going to tell you guys all about that after the episode, we're going to put out info on how
you can register your interest for that.
But it's going to be a 12 month long advanced coaching certification.
So we're going to be doing monthly webinars and we're going to have an option for monthly tutorial
case study calls as well where you can unpack some of the stuff we've done the webinars and also
case study some of your clients.
So it's going to be launching the first webinar in April and driving for 12 months from there.
So this has been something that's been a while in the making.
Chris, is there anything you want to tell people about it or?
You know, it's, it's a really exciting project because we've got lots and lots of very cool stuff to
talk about.
There's going to be a mix of sort of advanced training techniques, some very cool discussions around
how we can implement different types of strength training.
There's obviously going to be a lot of discussion around how fatigue can create problems for clients
and how to avoid that, how to manage that.
We're going to talk a lot about stress and negative effects of that on muscle mass and also how that
occurs during dieting restriction situations.
So there's lots and lots of different things that we're going to include in this course.
They're super, super relevant for people working with almost any population, whether it's a
powerlifter, whether it's an athlete, whether it's a Gen. pop, whoever it may, whoever it may be,
there's going to be some very cool stuff in here for you guys.
So very excited to bring this to you.
As Jake says, we're going to be delivering all of the details in the next couple of days, but there
will be a e-mail sign up for you to get my very latest information as soon as it comes out.
But come what may, we will be launching this at the beginning of April.
So whatever happens, it will come out.
So very excited about it.
Yeah.
And what I'm really excited for, because when we started talking about this project, we sort of
identified who are the groups of people that we work with that our clients, like our mentor and
clients work with.
And out of that conversation, it sort of evolved to, hey, here's some really key population groups
that modern coaches and model PE, modern personal trainers are working with.
And that I think when you go through normal personal training certifications and normal courses,
you're just not equipped to actually work with this type of client.
And so it became apparent very quickly that you know what, there's actually really important
significant population groups that people just don't particularly have, maybe have the skill set or
the knowledge or, you know, the ability to work with those populations in an effective way.
And out of that conversation, this entire webinar series has sort of evolved.
Exactly, exactly.
I mean like we've, we've obviously spent the last couple of years kind of working through the
fundamentals.
You know, how do we talk about training variables like load or rest period?
How do they actually work?
What are they doing?
And everybody I think who follows us now understands how those training variables work.
In the same way we've talked a lot about how neuromechanical matching and two joint muscle kind of
the problem 2 muscle problem works.
And so most people, again, understand how exercise works most of the time.
So that's the fundamentals of how to build a strength training program for any particular purpose,
whether it's, again, athletes, bodybuilders, or, you know, sort of strength athletes like power
lifters.
But what we're interested in doing with this course is exactly what you were just saying, which is
of providing people with the tools and the expertise to deal with more challenging situations,
whether it's, you know, the simple hard gainer who just can't add any muscles.
How do we how do we tackle that problem?
What's that process of tackling that problem?
Somebody's in a very kind of sustained period of caloric extraction.
Again, what are we doing to manage that problem and why is it done that way and not a different way?
You know, whether it's somebody who's working around some specific pain or injury, you know, whether
it's somebody who's got some kind of gastric distress, whatever it may be.
You know, what we want to do is deliver those kind of sort of frameworks for understanding those
problems and giving people the tools to work with people in those situations.
Yeah, and they're learning to not just theoretically understand, but also apply it.
And that's the value in those tutorial sessions we're going to be doing as well.
Absolutely, which is why there's both of us here because because otherwise you'd just get told by me
exactly what's going on.
And obviously it's not so exciting that we've understood exactly how it works and you'll be sitting
there.
OK, We now we need to go to the practical bit and talk about how that works and you know.
Yeah, exactly.
OK, well, we're going to be telling guys all about it, so I'm sure by the time you're listening to
this, you will have seen something on social media about it.
And we're going to start telling guys all the different topics and everything we'll be covering soon
enough.
So yeah, jump on our links, jump on our, our pages and we'll have links there where you can give us
your e-mail and we'll send you more info about how to sign up and when you can do that.
Now today's topic, we are doing AI guess an expansion or a as a second part, I guess to what we
started talking about last week when we're talking about how would one develop a program to maximize
a body part.
And in particular, we're talking about arms.
And so this week we're gonna talk about.
And in fact, you actually had this suggestion as soon as we finished last week's episode.
You said, you know what, we should probably do a glute version of it.
And funnily enough, as soon as I posted it online I was immediately getting questions asking for a
glute episode.
So you foretold what the people?
Want filled up as well immediately.
I just had a string of people saying the same thing so.
And it was almost all for glutes.
I've got a few for back.
I think I got one or two for chess, but it was almost exclusively for glutes.
So that's what we're going to talk about here.
Now you preemptively said to me, hey, go find a silver booty plan.
And that is easier said than done.
And after thinking and scouring some books and finding nothing, I thought, I know what I'll do.
I'll go to Reg Park.
Because good old Reg Park.
He was one of the most prolific Silver writers.
He had plans for every single muscle group you can imagine.
And not only I thought this was wishful thinking, but not only did I not find a Glee plan, I didn't
even find the hamstrings plan, which I think is so revealing given what we always see in these plans
where there's quads and that's it.
So once I saw that and I saw that Reg didn't even have any hamstring specialization plans, I
realized I'm not going to find a glute specialized plan.
And so the best I can do is find what we're female bodybuilders doing at the time.
Now what we've got here, there's something really important I want to talk about glutes.
And it's a little bit separate to this plan.
And I might, I might come back to it at the end.
So don't let me forget, but let's go with this plan first.
So this comes from someone named Abby Stockton.
So Abby Stockton was probably the most well known female.
She wasn't like obviously we didn't have competitive bodybuilding shows and and events for females
at this point in time.
We're talking in the 40s, but she was a, a female strength athlete.
She was a female bodybuilder.
Just we didn't have these these events and she had her own gym and she had she was contributing to
magazines and very well known personality.
Now she was known as a strength athlete and she was strong.
So there were like photos of her doing things where she was like holding her husband up, like arms
outstretched.
He was like doing hand stands off a outstretched hands.
She was doing like holding like a with a single arm, a 50K barbell overhead.
So she had was able to do pretty significant strength feats, which I think is worth keeping in mind
when we listen to the type of plan that the that she then espoused or or sort of recommended.
So I'm, I'm a little bit skeptical that maybe what we've got here is not exactly what she was in
fact doing to build her strength, but I think it's hopefully interesting nonetheless.
So this was a, a lower body focused plan and she does talk about training full body, but what we've
got here is specifically a, a lower body portion of that plan and it was meant to be done three
times per week.
So initially we have we have the good old commonplace exercise that everyone does in every gym all
around the world called thigh slapping.
Now this was kind of a warm up, so we're not gonna get too caught up in exactly what thigh slapping
was.
But essentially, if you can visualize this with me, you would begin by lying on the floor with one
arm.
So sort of supporting yourself with one arm and having your like your chest and your shoulders and
your toes are up off the floor and your legs lying front on the floor.
And essentially what you'd do is you would push your hips up towards the ceiling and then you would
drop your hips back down and you would smack your thigh against the floor.
And you would do this 10 times on each side.
Now, this was not meant to be a strength exercise.
They talked about this.
I, I believe they talked about it as, as breaking up the fat in the thigh.
So it is not a, not designed to build muscle.
And I think we could probably more or less move past this, this intro exercise.
Now the next exercise we had was heels elevated squats and it was heels highly elevated.
Now this was done for two sets and it was done double progression method that would do sets of 10
working up to sets of 25 any weight as you could.
Then we've got a line leg curl, which I think is interesting because we don't have a lot of
hamstrings work.
And this is we're talking 1947, I think when you publish this.
So to have a leg curl in 1947 is pretty interesting.
Now obviously that would have been using iron boots, so you would have been limited in how much load
one could actually use.
But again, we had two sets, starting with 10 repetitions and building repetitions up as needed.
Now we're gonna need to do a little bit more visualization here for these additional exercises.
So next we have a leg spread.
Now the leg spread worked by having the iron boots on lying on your back and having your legs
outstretched it like directly in the air and you would let your legs fall to the side and then you
would bring them back to the center.
So essentially we have AI guess an adduction type exercise with iron boots.
Now we kind of get the opposite of that where the next exercise we have two exercises.
I'll come back to the one in between.
But then we also have A and sort of an abduction type exercise where we have the iron boots on and
we're lying to the side and now we're raising our leg to the side doing more hip abduction.
Now obviously limited again with loads.
So these are relatively high repetitions, about 2020 repetitions per set, doing 2 sets of both of
these sort of adduction, abduction type exercises.
Now we also have what was called a bicycle motion.
Now.
It's exactly what it sounds like.
You're lying sort of, I guess.
What would you like?
Shoulders on the floor, legs pointing directly up to the ceiling.
I don't know what to like in that too.
But then doing literally a sort of bicycle type motion with your legs with the iron boots on.
Now for the life of me, I can't work out what that's doing.
I don't know if you've got anything that I'm doing there, but we'll come to that in a moment.
And then almost finished, we had a step forward alternating lunges and this was done with the
dumbbell.
And they were, they were doing the holding the dumbbell overhead.
I don't know that that particularly matters, but two sets of 10 with the with dumbbell.
And then the final exercise we have is a leg swinging exercise.
Now, the way this was done is lying flat on the floor on your back, and you would have one leg.
And this was unweighted, I believe.
I don't believe they use iron boots here.
And you would bring one leg as far out to the side, so crossing over the other leg as far up to the
side as you can.
And then you would do an arc and you'd bring it all the way over to the other side unloaded.
I don't imagine that's achieving anything.
I I don't even really know what would be used in that exercise, to be honest.
It was done for two sets of 10 done relatively quickly.
Again, unloaded.
I think that was probably just to look cool finishing off the workout.
So that and, and I will also mention this is one of the only workout plans you can find from a
silver era female lifter, because I get people asking for these all the time.
And there's very, very, very little out there apart from what Abby Stockton put out there, which
really is this and few other columns in some magazines.
There's almost nothing out there.
So are you gonna go emulate this work out in your next low body day?
Highly.
Unlike Oh my Kitty, you're gonna have a low body day.
So I do actually do line that goes.
OK, then.
Yeah, we've got one.
So I do actually have one out of all of this.
So OK, let's just try and summarize what this would look like in a modern gym.
So we've got a heels elevated squat, which you know, some people use anyway, but basically it just
allows you to get a little bit more kind of depth.
So ultimately it's probably going to be a relatively deep squat.
And then we've got obviously the line let go.
We've got which is, you know, easy to understand.
We've got lunges, you know, again, relatively easy to understand.
Really what we've kind of got with the other two exercises with the boots on, they're kind of
abduction and abduction, aren't they really?
So the closest thing you're going to get in a modern gym then is just the seated abduction and
abduction machines.
So you know, nothing, you know, come too horrifying there.
And then the bicycle with iron boots really is probably quite close to a leg press, 45° leg press, I
would say single leg variation.
Ultimately that's the closest thing about that.
So the reality is there's nothing kind of, I mean, taking into account the fact that they just
didn't have that kind of machine equipment.
Those, those are the excises that they're kind of moving in that direction.
So if you really want to go something, go go and put something in with a leg swing.
It's not a million miles away from a four way hip extension machine either Done, you know, probably
done as a flexion.
So it's going to give you some rec fun basically.
But again, you know, whether that's as you say, rather than whether it's just to kind of warm down
the end, I don't know.
But that would be kind of the way I would say.
So in terms of how that stacks up against what we will be doing today.
I mean, reps are a little bit high, but again, that's probably just an equipment issue again with
the weight that's possible to strap onto an iron boot.
So, so, you know, sets aren't, you know, particularly high total volume isn't too, too crazy.
So other than that, really just kind of saying, well, where's where's the, where's the kind of glute
bridge?
That's really the thing that's missing.
Everything else is kind of fairly logical really.
I don't see anything apart from the just equipment limitation and the general kind of strangeness of
the, of the description.
It just isn't really that, you know, kind of mad.
You know, I was looking to really add out a full lower body workout for maximum muscle growth.
Really.
The hip thrust or gluten variation is a thing that's screamingly obviously missing.
Seated leg curl would be nice because I really do kind of want, you know, more than one hamstrings
exercise most of the time.
But the reality is I would probably drop the lunge because I think you get more muscle damage than
you really need.
But everything else is would probably be in there.
Yeah, I think we take out the thigh slapping, you take out the leg swinging, they take out the the
bicycle well.
You know, honestly, the bicycle really is just a leg press.
That's what they're doing.
Yeah, in a very awkward position where you're kind of doing this headstand kind of thing.
Yeah, yeah, it is interesting.
I just see that as an equipment limitation.
I don't think we need to read too much into that and say that they thought there was anything
special about that.
Yeah, I suppose the the downside is they obviously had late dress, right, Like they were doing this
with barbells and it's frustrating that she wasn't doing that as the option here like that they had
I.
Actually think that's the sign of.
I think that's the sign of a fully, fully developed survival mechanism.
If somebody understands that you don't really want a load of barbell on your feet above your head.
I think anybody who's doing that was certifiably insane.
So honestly, I'm not sure that it says anything bad about this program whatsoever.
I was impressed to see the abduction and adduction work because I don't I haven't seen that anywhere
else in the silver era as far as I can recall.
Like obviously even he gets, you know, Hipping gene in squats and whatever else.
But in terms of trying to isolate it more, this is the only time I ever saw that.
Now you made a point about a hip trust and that's what I wanted to return to.
So I have scoured fun why trying to find any evidence of any of these silver area lifters doing any
form of a hip thrust.
And there are some variations of I believe they would call him like a wrestler's bridge with a kind
of doing almost like a hip strust motion.
But usually they're supporting themselves on their neck and not on their their upper back.
But what I have found, I don't know if you've heard of this, is a belly toss.
Are you familiar with the belly toss?
So the belly toss was basically fully a hip strust or I should say good bridge, except the only
difference is once they push the bar up into the top position, they use the momentum to then pull
the bar overhead.
And so they use like a combination of upper body exercise with the hip thrust.
I've only found it documented in one place.
I think that we're using it as an accessory for benching, but that is the.
The the only version I could find, which I found a photo of it and the photo looks exactly like a
glute Ridge.
So it's I don't know.
They didn't know that they were getting glute work out of it.
If they just didn't mention it, they didn't care about glutes.
But it yeah, it is it is interesting that there was just such little glute hamstring focus up until
at least the golden era emerged.
Yeah.
Totally.
But I think where I'm at on that program is that, yes, when when you first sent to me, I was like,
what on earth is this?
But actually analysing it and just taking into account equipment limitations and things like that,
it's not actually as bad as it looks.
There's some pretty fundamentally solid kind of ideas in there.
And really, as I say, the only thing that's missing is is the glute with your hip respiration and
then and then, you know, some kind of different hamstrings exercise because a lying leg goes not
really going to do everything.
So, yeah, so I think that's pretty cool.
Yeah, and, you know, the volumes are good, like you said, two sets.
And you know, she's starting off with about set to 10.
Nothing.
There's too crazy.
Yeah, I think I agree with you when you first said you're like, what the hell are we looking at?
And then when you go a bit deep, you're like, a lot of this makes sense.
So what would you do differently?
Or would you just do exactly this and add in the head chest?
Obviously this is a lower body worker and we're kind of talking about glutes today.
So really I just kind of want to sort of give a framework for how I would approach the concept of
glute training really.
And then there's a couple of little rabbit holes that we can go down and talk about some other bits
and pieces along the way.
So essentially the way I always approach any muscle group, like we approached with arms training
last week is just to kind of say, well, how many kind of areas am I dealing with?
Because a lot of the time when you talk to someone about glutes, they they do, I mean, they're kind
of aware that there's like a, you know, the glute Max and then they go, oh, yeah, OK.
And what about other kind of muscles like the gluteus medius and stuff?
But talk about those today.
But that's generally the way people think.
They're like, Oh, well, are we talking about, you know, just the glute Max or are we talking about
other stuff as well?
But the reality is that you can actually subdivide the glute Max relatively kind of easily.
And there is kind of very clear upper division away from the lower division where you kind of got
the top third is kind of more upper and then the bottom 2/3 is kind of more lower.
Some people have even gone as far as, and there's a recent study came out just a couple of years ago
I think where they actually looked at it in three separate regions.
Very, very much the way that you kind of get analysis done of things like the PEC and the LAT.
So when people talk about the fact they do kind of either go, you know, curricular and then sterno
coastal, whereas the reality is you should say, you know, kind of curricular, sternal and coastal
because they are actually three separate divisions.
But given that sternal and coastal are so fundamentally similar in many ways, most people just say
sterno coastal.
And you get the same thing with a lab.
People just go, OK, thoracic and then, you know, lumbar and pelvic.
And then it's like you end up saying lumbopelvic, you know, incident, incidentally, that's why I do
kind of repeatedly refer to them as, you know, lumbar and pelvic and not lumbar and iliac the way
some other people do, because literally, literally does combine lumbar and pelvic, call them lumbo,
pelvic, and you use that.
If you start calling them iliac, nobody knows what you're talking about.
So ultimately, terminology wise, what we see is this tendency for the top region to be kind of
separate and have a very distinct function.
And then the other two lower segments tend to either.
They do have slight differences, but they are so similar that people tend to group together when
they're doing anatomical or EMG analysis.
You get exactly the same thing with the glue.
You get this upper region and you get 2 kind of lower regions.
Most of the time people just group those two lower regions together and call them lower.
But as I say, there are analysis done where they kind of separate that middle one out as well.
Honestly, I don't think it makes a lot of kind of sense doing that because it really doesn't do
anything as far as we can tell at the moment, really vastly different from, you know what the lower
region is doing.
So OK, that's kind of like just basic intro into what we're dealing with in terms of regions.
Broadly speaking, the upper region is the only region that has an abduction function.
So when we're doing any kind of abduction of the hip, you're going to get upper region activation in
the glute.
You're not going to get any lower.
You might get a little bit in the middle as in the top of the top of the lower region, but you're
definitely not going to get any at the lower lowest end of that.
In fact, the lowest part of it is probably moving towards being an adductor rather than an abductor.
So ultimately you're not going to see anything there.
But then when you kind of look at that as a, you know, in, in in practical context, generally
speaking, there are other pretty solid abductors as well, like the glute medius.
So a lot of the time the upper glute Max isn't going to be the prime kind of candidate for the brain
to use in those situations.
Always kind of prefer to use the glute medius or something else.
If we actually sit down and end up in a kind of, you know, flexed hip position, then you do actually
get more upper glute Max involvement and less glute medius.
So ultimately, and that's the kind of way that we would go about starting to push activation towards
the upper glute Max with an abduction function.
And ultimately that is why a lot of people say, well, can we, you know, lean forward and make that,
you know, even better?
And I'm not well, you know, maybe and I say maybe because all the time with with moment on data is
that you're limited to what data exists.
So you have to go and look at what data is available to you and then say, OK, maybe I can
extrapolate a little bit outside of this range of motion.
But if I start to extrapolate too much, then a lot of the time with moment times, they do go in a
given direction and they start to tape about the other way.
So if I'm looking at moment, time changes over range of motion, classically, if I look at moment
time changes over range of motion and something like the elbow flexors, the leverages increase
pretty kind of linearly through to the end range of motion, but they do kind of taper off again
right to the top end.
A lot of the time, moment times will go up to a peak and then start going back down again.
So if you're looking at multiple moment times going in different directions, you want to see which
one has the best average, which kind of point you can extrapolate a little bit past the kind of
available data that you've got.
But if your data is topped at 60° and you want to say what happens at 120°, then I'm I'm sorry,
you're kind of hallucinating.
There's there's no way you can know what that's going to be doing in that particular scenario.
But if you want to, I know, kind of push up to 90° from 60°.
I'm not, I'm listening.
I'm not OK, I can get that.
So I think ultimately when people are saying, you know, leaning forward is going to get you even
more glute Max, I'm like upper glute Max in an abduction exercise.
I'm like, maybe, but I'm not confident like extrapolate that far from the existing kind of data
range of motion that we've got.
So that's kind of where I'm at.
And so I'm not, I'm not arguing with people who say they think that leaning forward is is
beneficial.
I'm saying it very possibly could be.
I'm just, I'm not confident pushing the existing range of motion data that far at the moment.
So yeah, that's kind of where I would see abduction.
Seated abduction should give you pretty decent upper glue Max that kind of contributions, therefore
training effects, but whether or not leaning forward is going to be substantially better than just a
90° position, especially if it starts to reduce stability.
I'm, I'm kind of on the fence on that one really.
So I'm not, as I say, I'm not disagreeing with people who want to do it, but also I'm not kind of
being supremely confident about recommending that people do that particular kind of body position in
that exercise is all that kind of hanging together.
Yeah, absolutely.
So how would you compare CA to standing?
Well, in standing, you're going to lose an enormous amount of the upper glute Max's involvement in
the abduction movement.
You're going to get mostly from the glute medius instead.
I mean, ultimately if people want to train the glute medius as well, then that's a great way to do
it.
I mean, do the standing position or the lying position.
I mean, you can do some pretty good at loading of the glute medius in that particular kind of
movement.
It's a very common rehab movement.
Have at it.
There's no reason why not to if you want to do that.
But it's not really going to be an upper glute group Max exercise in that context.
That's interesting because it essentially you're saying obviously that's an independent whether you
need it based on your goals, but those two exercises are not redundant if you did them both.
So some actually have both a seated and a standing abduction exercise.
Yeah, Totally, absolutely.
I mean they're they're in the same way that adduction does that as well.
I mean, ultimately it's, it's definitely kind of definitely a, a valid approach to include both of
those kind of exercises in a, in a program.
I don't see if you know, if you do actually want those different muscle groups to grow.
I mean, not everybody does.
And so that's, you know, totally a matter of a starting point of the pro and so.
If someone's saying a sated abduction, then is there much difference between the shortened position
and the the lengthened position in that exercise?
If one were to do use more like accommodating resistance, use a band in that exercise, is that going
to change much?
I don't actually think we've got any kind of data that will let you see that.
I don't think we've got range of motion across all of that spectrum.
So this is the problem we have for moment times.
You get the base data, you get anatomical position, but you don't necessarily get other stuff as
well.
So we've got nice data for standing, hip abduction and all the range of motion through that.
Yeah, absolutely.
Actually, there's not an enormous amount of difference there, but you don't have the same thing for
seated.
Found the same thing, so yeah.
It's a shame because I do like I do like using a band in the seat of abduction because obviously the
limitation for a lot of people is going to be load.
And yes, you can get a Jim pin or whatever.
But a lot of the time if you're just using a stack, there's going to be a lot of lifters who are
going to be limited doing, you know, 152025 repetitions and load is just going to be the problem
there.
So a hacked, I like to use a lot of my clients is to add a booty band to it.
And like you've just said there, we don't exactly know what that's doing.
So it is the limitation some of the data, isn't it?
Oh, totally.
I mean that, I mean that's, that's what you're, as I say, that's what you're always going to see in,
in any moment on data analysis.
You just, you're going to have the, you're going to have the basic kind of planes of motion from the
anatomical position and you're not going to have a lot else.
But you know, I mean, ultimately in from the standing position with abduction, you're either working
the TfL or you're working the glute medius.
I mean, those are the kind of the two that you're going to be working.
So if you're working one end of the range of motion, you're going to be working 1, you weren't
working the other end of the range of motion working the other.
So and though you're not, but there's no scenario where you're really going to be working the upper
glute Max.
So that's not kind of relevant for our purposes today.
So if you've got a seeded abduction in, is that kind of all you need there for upper boots in?
I think that's a really, really solid exercise for the upper glute.
Yeah, I do.
I think that ultimately it will get worked in other exercises where you're, you know, training in a
glute in hip extension.
But generally speaking, the middle and kind of lower part solid glute call them lower glute as a
whole are going to be the sort of the contributor that's, you know, bigger in the in the kind of the
hip extension exercise.
I mean, all of glute will do external rotation.
I mean that's something that is absolutely kind of under appreciate that thing.
I mean, all glute does external rotation, but external rotation is just tough to load.
I mean, that's kind of why people end up doing the the kind of high Rep start for they start
chasing, you know, metabolic stress or something.
It's not necessarily a great idea, but ultimately that's that.
That's just an equipment limitation.
But yeah, I mean, external rotation, absolutely.
The whole glute does it and it does it well.
Maybe a few little bits of difference between upper and lower depending on the kind of maybe the
range of motion or whatever.
But fundamentally it's a solid epics.
It's not a really solid hip external rotate.
So practically though we're going to restart with hip extension.
So you know, essentially we're going to look for parts of the range of motion of hip flexion where
the where the glute has best leverage and everybody knows that that is in the fully extended
position, even slightly hyperextended.
So that kind of means exercises that give you peak effort in that position.
It's like glute prism hip thrusts are going to be the best kind of way to maximize recruitment of
that muscle group.
So you're going to get a massive amount of lower glute and you're going to get some upper glute as
well.
Is it worth going to the differences between a hip Strauss and a glute bridge?
Sure.
I mean, this is really cool.
And again, this is one of those areas where we can kind of make some steps to understand what's
going on.
And then the kind of you enter a bit of a hereby Dragons territory where it's a little bit unclear
what's going on.
So basically if you kind of look at the hip thrust, obviously I'm going to use some definitions
here.
If people don't agree with the terminology, actually doesn't matter.
They can just kind of call them whatever they want.
But I'm just going to say that head thrust has the back on a bench and therefore the body position
is parallel with the ground in the fully contracted position.
So in other words, kind of in that sort of body straight with a 90° angle at the knee when you reach
the top position.
Now if you measure the distance between the barbell on the hip and the knee joint, then what we're
going to very loosely call the external moment on the barbell on the hip is going to be the length
of the femur.
Now again, some people kind of biomechanically look at that and they go, don't think that's fair to
call that the external moment on because you've got a position of support the back on the bench.
I don't actually care.
When you see what I'm going to do in a moment, it doesn't really matter that much.
So we're just going to basically have the hip with their weight on it and then the distance between
the hip and the knee joint I'm going to call the external moment on just for the purposes of this
analysis.
If I now compare that with a glute bridge, glute bridge has the back resting on the floor and
therefore the knee angle kind of top position is now close to maybe sort of it's no longer 90°, kind
of a much steeper angle.
So in that situation, we're now going to say that the horizontal distance between the barbell
position on the hip and the knee joint horizontal distance is now no longer the female because the
femur is now the hypotenuse of that triangle.
So what you've just done is basically bring the barbell close to the knee joint, which then is going
to require a smaller knee extension torque and therefore less quadriceps muscle force and therefore
less quadriceps activation.
You can confirm that that is indeed the case by just comparing quadriceps activation in hip thrusts
and glute bridges and seeing that quadriceps activation is in fact a lot lower in glute bridges
compared to hip thrust.
And again, it's like, yeah, exactly what we would be expecting.
So why is that important?
But basically why it's important is that it tells us that hip thrust is actually giving you a
reasonable quad stimulus, not maximal one, but it's definitely training the quad to a degree and the
and as a result, you are then going to have a central motor command sending activation to the quad
to a much greater extent in hip thrust in comparison with the good bridge.
So given that central motor command is limited and you can't just, you know, activate every single
muscle in the body to the maximum level like some people's who think you can, you're going to end up
with lower levels of good activation in the hip thrust compared to the good bridge.
And again, that is exactly what activation studies have shown that if you compare a glute bridge
with air first, you get higher glute activation in the glute bridge.
It's because you've got less quad activation.
Therefore you don't have the sort of limitation on how much central mode command is going to other
places.
So honestly, if I'm thinking about training a, you know, glute kind of to the maximum extent, I'm
much more likely to want to encourage people to use a glute bridge as long as it's comfortable.
I mean, if people are very uncomfortable in the exercise, then it's obviously going to limit their
performance.
But if they're comfortable doing a glute bridge, I'd rather they do that than a hip thrust, simply
because they are going to get more glute activation because they've got less quad activation.
Yeah, and you made a good point there that it's going to come down to an extent to comfort and how
that exercise is going to feel for the client.
You know, it's an exercise I like to program when I can, but so many people will complain that it's
just too uncomfortable.
They need to use so much load for the the glucose compared to a hip trust that it just becomes
unfazible.
And there's some good work.
Yeah.
So it just depends.
And you can follow up multiple yoga mats and you can check on the pad and you can do lots of things
to pad it.
And for some people it will be OK.
I, I want to ask a question on that point because you've just said there that the hip thrust is
going to involve more quads.
But so many people are going to listen to this and be like, no, no, no, no.
When I do a a glitteridge, I feel my quads more.
There must be more quad involvement in that.
Can you cover that?
No, not really.
I mean, what I What do you want me to say?
I.
Mean well, I'm assuming what's happening is just the the angle of.
Yeah.
Maybe they're feeling and so this is more stretching.
Because something I don't know, I mean, but ultimately there isn't more, there isn't more, There
isn't a higher knee extension torque and there isn't more quad activation.
So.
No.
So I think the point there is that sensation does not always correlate with activation.
And just because you're feeling a stretch in your quad because of the angle of the the knee joint
does not mean that you are in fact getting more quadricep activation in that exercise.
And that is one of that is probably the exercise I hear this with most where someone would be like,
Oh no, but I I feel XXX muscle in this exercise.
Therefore it means why it's like no, no, no, no, no.
All that's happening I think is you're just feeling a stretch in your quad.
Now, is it worth because you've mentioned external rotation, What would happen if one were to do
external rotation with while performing the hit trust of Glutridge?
Is that worth doing?
So maybe so we've got a little bit of EMG data suggesting that an abducted hip and or an externally
rotated foot.
So kind of trying to externally rotate the hip to a degree and I'm not sure how successful that's
going to be.
Is is likely to increase glute activation in a hip thrust context or clear bridge context.
Again, if you think about it, if you kind of move to a more abducted hip position, you're, you're
doing something similar to going between a hip thrust and a group bridge or from a group bridge to a
hip thrust and back again.
You're basically reducing that distance, that horizontal distance between the Barber and the knee
joint in that plane.
So potentially that could again start to give you an advantage in terms you'll end up using a lot
more weight again, but you'll end up using a kind of a bit more gluten, a little bit less quad.
Also, you just have to be aware that in some of these EMG studies they do tend to have a.
That kind of habit of putting the activation electrodes quite high up on the glute.
So it's possible that what you're seeing with the external rotation or abduction is actually a
movement of activation from the lower glute to the upper glute.
That could be the case as well.
So again, we've got to be aware that sometimes EMG is giving you information that is, I mean, it's
totally valid information.
It's just that our interpretation of it may not always be perfect if we ignore exactly where the
electrode placement are, you know, kind of being being done.
So, you know, that's one of those things I'll be aware of.
So yeah, I think it's interesting to play around with foot position.
I don't think it's going to create a hugely problematic effect.
But honestly, most of the time, I think that the simple glute bridge with kind of shoulder width
position feet is probably going to be more than satisfactory for the lower glute for most people
most of the time.
And obviously if it does kind of start, if if an abducted hip or externally rotated kind of position
does move activation from the lower to the upper glue, then that would be a bit of a negative.
If we've already got a seated hip abduction, we're trying to use the low kind of use the glute
bridge as a lower glutex size.
So honestly, I'm kind of like, again, yes, it's kind of interesting.
Probably wouldn't rush to do it straight away.
Maybe I'd sort of include it as a variation from time to time, but not necessarily something that
I'm going to jump on straight away and say this is definitely what we need to do all the time.
The way I use that exercise, if I've got a client who they want to build the glutes, but for
whatever reason, we're not going to do multiple glute exercises, we're not going to do a seeded
abduction as well, I'm often using that variation of a HIT.
Trust in that situation where we're just seeing that one exercise.
Yeah, Yeah.
I think that makes a lot of sense.
Is there any value to doing again banded exercises here?
So doing a banded hips for us and making it harder in that contracted position, is any value to that
or is it effectively going to be the same thing?
I think it's going to be the same thing.
So I think it comes down to how it feels.
I mean, if the band or some extra bands allow it, allow us an easier set up and make it more
comfortable.
And obviously the band is, is useful in the sense that, you know, when you sort of take the tension
off, it just goes away.
You've got no load at all.
So you can kind of be sort of sitting lower down in that at the bottom of the exercise and you
haven't got, you know, kind of a a billion tons kind of sitting on top of you.
So that from that perspective can be very useful.
Again, also means that you're not stealing every single kind of £45 plate in the gym, which is
something that goes wrong with shrugs as well.
You know, people will say to me, oh, I don't want to do Kelsey shrugs.
I'm just going to do my classic vertical shrug.
And I'm like, OK, I bet you're popular because you're going to have to steal everybody else's
weights.
I mean, it's just like the same problem with hippos used to use so much weight that unless your gym
is like ridiculously well equipped where you've got your own gym and very, very difficult to kind of
use the kind of loads that you want to use.
But so I think that for that reason, bands can be very interesting.
But yes, fundamentally from a physiological point of view, it's pretty much doing exactly the same
thing.
So that is basically then we've got our really good exercise for the kind of upper glute, a really
solid exercise for the lower glute.
And again, some variations of that.
We don't have to do glute bridges.
You can do head thrust.
You can as again move feet in different positions.
It's not none of those things are kind of like, you know, make or break.
They're all kind of just small tweaks really.
I just want to talk a little bit then about stretch position.
So basically, the glute has its best leverage in the contractor position.
As a result, the active length tension plateau has migrated to that position.
I'm just going to give 2 minutes on this.
I answer this question like literally every two or three weeks, and then somebody else asks it again
and I'll answer it again.
And it seems like it's one of those kind of really annoying little myths that's just going to dig in
and never go away now.
But basically the active length tension plateau is literally just going to move to correspond to
whatever joint angle the muscle is being activated at, according to neuro mechanical matching.
Now people say to me, oh, no, no, no.
We think that the active length tension plateau tells the brain where to send activation.
So their brain is going to look for the location of that plateau and it's going to send that like,
OK, first of all, tell me how it's detecting that because I can't think of a way that it's able to
do that.
Secondly, tell me how sauchomerogenesis happens if you can't activate muscles very well off the
plateau.
If you constantly activate muscles on the plateau, you aren't going to get sauchomerogenesis and you
aren't going to get sauchomer loss.
You're just going to literally keep the number of sauchomers exactly the same all the time.
You have to have the ability to activate unless you're going to do static stretching of course, and
static stretching separate.
So if you want to move length tension plateau by doing static stretches, that's fine.
I mean, that's a separate question, but you can't get really psychomagenesis in an exercise if you
can't activate the Moss fibres off the length tension plateau.
It's just that simple.
So you, you are, you're literally telling me that you, if you think the active length tension
plateau is where what is something that the brain uses to decide where to activate a muscle in the
joint angle range of motion.
What you're telling me is that you don't think sarcomeogesis can happen in a strength training
context.
Well, I'm going to win that bet, I guarantee that.
I mean, we've already got data coming out on the eccentric training side showing that sarcomeogesis
happens in humans.
We're absolutely mountain of data in animals showing that it happens as well.
So ultimately I think the most logical explanation what's going on is that the brain activates
muscles accordingly to neuro mechanical matching and then the length tension of the toe just
migrates to wherever that is according to where you are regularly activated.
Mostly you'll end up with a plateau there and either end up doing that by taking sargamers out or
putting sargamers in.
So if we can activate the glute at a stretch position, we are likely to find that the experience is
quite robust sargamerogenesis the same way the cods do, because we are habitually activating the
muscle repeatedly in a contract position because that's where it has the best, overwhelmingly best
leverage.
So we're going to have a plateau in the contract position and a very, very long descending.
Then yes, there is a single modelling study that shows that the acta length tension plateau of the
glute is probably more likely at 45° rather than 0.
That's because the data they input into the model, not the model, didn't tell you that was the
output.
The model actually had that as a data input.
So yes, you're going to get the same numbers out that you put in.
So that model is not evidence for the glutes having a length tension plateau at 45°.
It's literally just that's what they put data in.
That's what they're going to get data as out.
So please don't send me that study.
I already know about it and it doesn't tell you anything.
So basically we've got a plateau at the contractor position, whether you have best leverage and then
you've got a really understanding limb.
So can we activate the glute in a stretch position?
And this is a really interesting question because ultimately we've got some studies showing that you
can get pretty meaningful glute muscle growth from things like squats and leg presses.
So, you know, is that actual pure hypertrophy?
Are we getting hypertrophy of the gluten in that position or is it a lot of sarcomereogenesis and
some hypertrophy?
I think it's a lot of sarcomereogenesis.
The reason I think that is because we can actually see a route to activating the glute in that
straight position if we just consider how the two joint muscle problem works.
So in most exercises with a lower body, you're going to have hip extension and knee extension
happening at the same time.
In some, you get just kind of hip extension and as a result, you're going to have hamstrings plus
glutes plus deductive Magnus and going to vary according to the range of motion.
So if you're in a kind of stiff leg deadlift position, you're going to get a lot of Magnus.
If you're in a kind of 45° back extension and you get a lot of hamstrings.
If you're in a kind of horizontal back extension, you're going to get a lot more glute.
OK, cool, that's just hip angle.
But if you start bending the knee and start extending the knee in those situations you start doing
squats instead of, you know, stiff leg deadlifts, you are going to find that immediately the
hamstrings just completely switch off because they would be called upon to do the flexion at the
same time as epic extension, and therefore that is going to massively reduce your efficiency.
So the brain just switches it off to joint muscle problem, antagonist inhibition, whatever you want
to call it.
Now if that's happening, then you've only got 2 hip muscles now to work.
So by taking the hamstrings out, the central mode command now is going to the hip extensors and
you're going to get a lot more glute than you would expect based on the poor leverage that the glute
has in that stretch position.
So I actually think that, you know, to be fair, I've probably sort of been a little bit harsh on
squats in the past about how much activation they do they create.
I think they probably create a bit more than I have been kind of kind of assuming that they do.
And it's literally just because of the two joint muscle problem that you end up with more available
centremotic band for the hip extensors.
Then you can reasonably distribute to that Doctor Magnus alone and to end up it spills over to Luke
Max and that's the only thing you've got.
So I think you probably do get a decent amount of sort of activation obviously in a stretch position
in a squat.
And of course you use a leg press, you get an even steeper hip angle, so you get more of the stretch
kind of position and therefore even more of that.
So I think a leg press, especially a single leg leg press where you get super high activation
because obviously single leg or single limb exercise is going to give you higher voluntary
activation than two limb exercise.
And the glute is a really big muscle, so it has a massive voluntary activation deficit the same way
that the quads do.
So I think a single limb variation is definitely the right way to go.
So a single limb kind of variation of a leg press could be a really, really good kind of stretch
position psychomenogenesis, inducing glute excise.
And of course, you know, in terms of training status, just because somebody has got, you know, like
3-4 years of training status behind them.
If they haven't been doing that, then whether it's they haven't been doing a leg press or they
haven't been doing a, maybe they've just been doing squats, I'm going to go in the same range of
motion or whether they've just been doing two leg variations, go to a single leg variation and a
pretty deep range of motion.
And I think definitely you would get a little bit new new of new psychromenesis compared to what
you've got previously.
And of course, you don't have to maintain that, but you know, maintenance volumes, it's relatively
low, so you'd have to go crazy.
Is all of that making sense?
Yeah.
So you're obviously not big on remaining deadlifts for glutes, and that explains why because you're
not getting into a stretch position enough to stimulate saccharogenesis if you're doing.
It's a lukewarm exercise, isn't it?
It's not doing anything.
Well, it's not, especially when it comes to the glue.
It's neither doing a contract because it's not, it's not as good as a hip for us for the contractor
position and it's not as good as a leg press for the stretch position.
So it's, it's, it's neither thing.
Well, sure.
I mean, it's, I mean, but it was designed originally for Olympic weight lifters for as an accessory
exercise.
So, you know, it's a sporting kind of movement support accessory really.
Now you would think that you will nonetheless get a bit more glute work in an RDL than you would
with this stiff leg dead lift because of what you said there about the hamstrings.
No, exactly.
Exactly.
But it's still not going to be ideal.
Now obviously everyone who's ever done I shouldn't, I shouldn't laugh about this.
What I learnt back in the day a million years ago was on the leg press.
If you want to focus on hamstrings, you, you did it with your feet.
I believe it was feet close together, up high.
If we wanted to focus on glutes, you would do feet up high, a bit far apart and then to focus on
quads was feet down low and together.
Now obviously we can take out the hamstrings from this equation.
You've explained why a moment ago, but in terms of and you did say single leg is going to be more
suitable here.
But in terms of foot position for glute, is there going to be anything significantly different
between doing foot up high, foot out to the side, foot down low like one would do for more
quadriceps focused or does it not particularly matter?
I mean, I think that probably foot position vertically is going to move the relative kind of joint
torques between hip and the knee.
So yeah, I mean I think you kind of have a low foot position, you are going to get more quadrant,
you have a higher foot position, you are going to get more hip.
So definitely think it's worth, you know, kind of exploring that.
I wouldn't worry too much about the abduction because as I say, I think single leg is probably more
important.
So you know, you just get far better activation kind of characteristics by doing that than worrying
about the kind of abduction angle.
By having.
So that's what I would have assumed as well.
And I would have assumed that obviously if you can shift a little bit focus away from the quads, so
you're going to get a little bit more glute work, but are you going to reduce your ability to
stretch the glute by putting your foot position up high compared to if you did have it in a lower
position?
Sure, you can check that.
I mean, you can just look at your hip angle.
I mean that's the thing.
There's a measurable quantity.
So just kind of get a camera from the side and see what your hip angle is looking like.
And if you find that that restricts you, then sure.
If you don't, honestly I find that it's less restricting to have the foot higher up for me.
Because it might come down to the individual.
So I think it probably is an individual thing.
I think it depends what your quad no quad stretch mobility is like and that kind of thing.
So I'll dorsiflexion and that.
So ultimately just see what is going to work.
But yeah, we're aiming for hip angle.
So whatever it kind of takes to get the in that position.
That's interesting.
Interesting.
You say that you actually feel like you can achieve A deeper angle up high, because for me it's the
opposite.
So I wonder whether maybe limb length comes into it or yeah, that'll be.
Lengths of lower and upper kind of leg.
I mean, there could be all kinds of weirdnesses going on, so yeah.
But so again, we know what we're aiming for, so don't kind of.
So you can self assess that relatively easily.
And just self assess, yeah, yeah.
So kind of what we've ended up with then is 3 exercises that I think would be, you know, kind of
really, really solid kind of team of or collection of exercises where you've got the seated hip
abduction, the kind of blue bridge and the that kind of single leg leg press.
And I think that those three together would be absolutely the core of any kind of glute training
program that I would put together.
I think they're pretty unbeatable.
Now you can kind of vary a little bit, you know, like we were just talking about the leg pressure.
You can vary foot position a little bit from time to time or get something that you like.
Again, with the glute bridge or hip transpiration, you can vary that a little bit.
With the seated hip abduction, maybe you can vary kind of the angle of the hip a little bit, leaning
forward a bit or just sitting up right or whatever you want to do.
So there's come a little.
So there are some variations in there within each category.
But fundamentally, I think that would be where I'll go.
I don't think there's anything else that really comes close.
I mean, yeah, there are other exercises that kind of do more or less the same sort of thing that you
could argue the horizontal back extensions, you know, fundamentally are in the same category as a
group is, although honestly I just don't think they are going to get close to the same level of
activation you're going to get in plus.
But you know, that's just a stability issue.
And again, like you said, there's RDLS that you could argue are kind of starting to get close to
Scott, but I don't really think they, they get all the way there.
And, and honestly, again, I, I still think the leg press gets you a better kind of hip angle than
and most squat variations would do.
So, yeah, I'm not saying that you can't do RDS or squats and get to the walls the same territory as
a, as a single leg leg press.
But in the, in the, in the analysis that we've just done, the single leg press just comes out on top
for, for the reasons that we explained with a better hip angle and the higher level of voluntary
activation.
And, and, and yeah, really that would be kind of where I would leave it.
You know, an external rotation exercise would be wonderful to be able to put in there, but I don't
see one available that is really kind of stable.
Now, that doesn't mean that there isn't one out there.
You know, I'm sure there's people out there that have, have constructed some really cool exercises
that may be getting towards that level of stability.
The fact that I haven't seen them just is because I'm not looking, I don't scour the Internet
looking for that kind of stuff.
It's not my, it's not my expertise, isn't my zone of of of kind of.
What have you seen people do for?
That well, there's obviously there's the kind of the classic physio exercise where you kind of do AI
think they're called clamshell exercises where you basically you lie on your side, you bend the hip
and the knee and you put your ankles together and then you rotate about the ankle.
And you can add a little bit elastic resistance to that.
But it's really really kind of limited in terms of how much kind of stability you've got and how
much resistance you can really generate.
Often used in rehab, you know, but not really something that you're likely to see.
I think getting to the levels of loading that you would want.
Again, doesn't mean that somebody hasn't figured that out, But I haven't seen it because I haven't
been scouring the Internet looking for that kind of thing.
Now, how much value you think there is in doing unilateral versions of these exercises?
Obviously you've mentioned the leg Crest, you think that that's a worthwhile exercise to do.
But in, in terms of like a, a glute Ridge or I mean seated abduction is quite difficult.
I find the machine very difficult to do unilaterally just due to the setup of the machine.
But in terms of the hips also glute Ridge or back extension or any of those type of exercises, I
always because I do often program it.
But then I also wanted to myself how much we losing here just due to I guess the instability or the?
Instability on Airbus is huge.
As soon as you take, as soon as you, you go from two leg to one leg, you lose an enormous amount.
Just I mean just people can just go away and do the calculation.
I mean you should have higher kind of load per leg in hip thrust for single leg variation than two
leg.
Nobody can do that.
Nobody can do that.
See, I often wonder this like even with a back extension, right?
Like would we, I mean back extension is difficult because you get your torso weight there as well.
So it's very hard to calculate.
But would we expect say that in a hip thrust then that someone due to the bilateral force deficit
you should actually be seen double the weight or more than double?
The weight, unless stability is taking weight off because it's reducing activation of your prime
movers and increasing of the current and increasing of the of the antagonist.
Yeah, you should be able to lift to have your weight.
You should be able to more than 50% of your of your bilateral load and you can't, nobody can.
So really I'm saying maybe there's going to be somebody out there who can be.
You'll start your videos in yeah?
Nobody.
Yeah.
Filling up our own boxes with videos of people doing that, but I think most people most of the time
aren't going to be able to.
Do that, no.
So I, I mentioned I do some programming, I almost always program it purely based off load.
I program because bilateral is too heavy for people that it's hurting the hips too much and we don't
really have an alternative.
And so I use this to limit the load, but I'm not overly happy about doing it.
But do you see?
Any value in actually programming or or is kind of what you're saying if you.
Haven't got any.
If you haven't got any other options, then yeah, I mean, that's where you're at.
But you wouldn't choose to do it if bilateral is working.
This is not a situation most likely where doing the unilateral version of this exercise is going to
be superior than doing the bilateral version.
Exactly.
But again, you can literally see that because.
You can just.
Count the numbers.
I mean, this is kind of like one of those kind of situations where it's like we don't need to
speculate about this.
You just kind of count multiply by two.
Which you know, can be challenging for something.
You know, it's a pretty basic idea.
So yeah, so I think really if if you're one of those people who's, you know, kind of single leg hip
thrust is magically kind of more than 50% of your two leg hip thrust and have at it.
But most people's aren't going to be.
And if you're going to do it as an exercise, I don't know how you feel about this, but I would, I
would encourage people to do B stands, not a true single leg.
So if you're if, when we say single leg, if you're hearing us say have one leg floating in space,
that's going to be ridiculous and that's going to add huge amounts of instability.
Very, very difficult.
Yeah.
So at the very least have your other foot.
Well, I'm not going to explain it.
There's a Google B stand tip Trust and do that variation would be my recommendation.
Yeah, no.
Proper single leg with one leg out sort of floating in the air is tough.
It is a really tough exercise.
I've I've, I've kind of used it.
I think it's really hard.
Yeah, I was using those back during lockdowns and I had no access to any equipment.
And I'm so glad.
So glad.
It's a really miserable experience.
So.
So yeah.
So I think that that kind of honestly for me is a, is a, is a full suite of, of, of glute exercises.
I think really those three are going to be the foundation of any solid glute training program.
I think anything else is either going to be duplicating what you've already got in that kind of
collection and and and probably not doing as good a job.
You know what I find with glutes and I guess to an extent most muscles would probably be similar to
this, but I feel I feel more strongly about this with glutes that if your goal is to maximum develop
glutes, there's kind of like a, a very clear formula for it and there's not a lot of point deviating
from that.
And so for my girls who had focus on glutes, 90% of my programs look the same from a glute
perspective.
I'll change other stuff, but all the glute stuff is really the same.
And usually I just, I literally will just run it exactly as is almost indefinitely.
There'll be very little change I make.
And the format that I use generally speaking is going to be I'll use abductions, seeded abduction
like we've talked about.
I'll use hip straps like we've talked about.
And then I'll use like like press later on usually as we've talked about.
And the only thing I do any differently, and I think we've touched on this in one podcast in the
past, and I know that this is one of those areas where I'm going to ask you to speculate which you
love doing.
But I have heard feedback from a number of people that they, they felt like they were getting better
results doing slightly higher repetitions with glutes than doing lower repetitions repetitions.
And obviously that's not going to apply to everyone, but I've heard this enough times from people
that I started to wonder, could there be something to this?
And we've obviously talked about this privately in the past.
And so one thing that I do do with some of these clients is that first exercise, which is gonna
usually be some kind of contractor position exercise.
I might program that high repetitions and it'll usually just be a single set and it'll be high
velocity, slightly high reps, and that I might not even use per SE as a hypertrophy exercise.
I may even then give them that same exercise later in the workout with a heavier load, but I might
be using that first exercise literally to get a pump and just to actually influence internal moment
arm length of the glutes for some of those.
You're laughing at me because you're I'm not laughing.
I'm just like, this is a speculation, you're right.
I wondered that.
I thought, yeah, that's why he's laughing at me.
Because.
It's a really interesting idea.
No, you're right.
I mean, yeah, I mean, it could well create a shift in the way the brain sees the muscle working
relative to other muscles and therefore gives you a bigger priority.
You know, I think if you do that consistently, it has a chance of working.
But.
And it's not the kind of thing I would just do for a phase, right?
I'm not going to say to someone, hey, go do this for four weeks and let's hope for the best.
This is something I'm normally doing for three to six months.
That's what I'm saying.
So like, if if the brain repeatedly sees that muscle being larger and therefore having better
leverage every single time it does the exercise, then I think it has a chance of creating some kind
of, you know, kind of new coordination pattern based on that data.
It's just if people are doing it and then not doing it and then doing it and they're not doing it,
then it's going to be less of a a consistent signal.
But you know, realistically, yeah, it should work, but don't I've got no data that I can kind of
point and say, yeah, OK.
I mean, it's worth just it's worth kind of mentioning there is there is motor learning data that
uses the glute showing that if you do kind of what amounts to kind of glute squeeze kind of
exercises where you kind of just trying to do an internal kind of focus on my muscle connection, we
kind of really contracting the muscle as hard as you can in a single joint, single limb position.
Then the brain starts to kind of use that muscle more in a subsequent kind of multi joint exercise
like air thrust, you know, tensity or so maybe something like a squat.
So you know, there is kind of that whether that's unique to the glue or whether that's just kind of
something that you can kind of do with any muscle, I don't know.
But you can start to influence these things, especially non trained people.
And whether that is, you know, just because people have got it.
Because ultimately, you know, we talk about, I talk about how neural mechanical matching works, but
you have to bear in mind that neural mechanical matching is based on the brain collecting
information as you go and then starting to implement that.
So ultimately you can have scenarios where, you know, coordination patterns are habitual and you are
doing something in a different way from the way you predict.
But as your coordination pattern refines and the brain starts to use the muscles in the way that it
figures out is the best way to do it, you'll end up more or less with a, you know, kind of fairly
predictable kind of movement pattern using the muscles you're expecting to use.
But you can get variances to start with.
And I think maybe is that is the glute doing that because it's habitually kind of been used in a
different context in a different way and therefore the brain tries to apply that.
I don't know.
I mean, there's there's there's stuff there that we don't know.
But yeah, I think maybe there's there's a role for either that kind of muscle pump or maybe kind of
a sort of mind muscle connection in sort of especially in non trained people, if you find that
they're not able to kind of feel like they're getting much glue work in the exercise.
So if you're programming air thrust and persons like I just can't feel my glute in this, I think it
is worth playing around with my muscle connection a little bit or as you say, maybe some muscle pump
type stuff.
You know, it's not necessarily something that's going to work or not work and you know, just try it.
It's not at the end of the world, but there's definitely enough kind of indications in the
literature that that is something, you know, there's something interesting there.
And I'm being a little bit vague because I'm trying not to.
I'm trying not to kind of ultimately this is actually useful kind of just insight because one of the
things that I tried to avoid doing is drawing a conclusion before I've got the information necessary
to draw that conclusion.
And because I think what happens if you draw a conclusion too early, Then you become emotionally
invested in that conclusion.
And then you have to kind of then wriggle around any future data that comes out, then disagree with
that conclusion.
You end up just kind of digging yourself into a gigantic hole and eventually just get buried by all
the new data that's contradicting your position.
Whereas the longer you wait before you commit to a conclusion, the more open you are to new
information, the more accurate your final solution to whatever problem it is that you're kind of
addressing is going to be.
So if you're trying to figure out how, you know, these kind of data points fit together in terms of
like, you know, kind of why have we got this data suggesting that I can, you know, kind of do
contract hot, you know, maximum effect glue contractions and that somehow changes how the glue's
working in a multi dentexile later on.
If I say, well, I'm not actually sure how that works, then when new data comes out, then I can fit
those pieces together and I can construct a kind of model or framework that gives me a really
valuable kind of tool in the future if I commit now.
And so I think this is how it's happening.
And then like 3-3 months time, another piece of data comes out that's completely the opposite.
And actually if I was able to put them two things together, I get something really interesting.
Now at this point with that commitment that I've made to the wrong conclusion, I'm stuck.
And I'm just kind of, I then just have a kind of like an emotional reactor.
I don't.
But, you know, whoever's done that has an emotional reaction and kind of sort of runs away and looks
at something else instead because they don't want to look at the thing that's upset them.
So I think it's really important if, like, there's data that's interesting, you know, we can say,
yeah, it's called really interesting.
I'm not going to commit to explaining how I think that works right now because I honestly don't
know.
And if I do commit and I'm going to make a mistake and then I'm going to be in trouble later on.
Does that make sense?
Yeah, absolutely.
Yeah.
I mean, ultimately I think most you said in the past, you know, a lot of decision making is
emotional base first and then we're rationalizing it afterwards.
And that's essentially what you probably do there.
If we make a decision and then we can be ourselves way.
It's one way in which you are creating an emotional problem for yourself later on is to make a
decision now whether it's emotional or not.
I mean, you can make a rational decision now, but you then gain attachment to it emotionally because
it's your decision.
And then later on you then have to unpick that.
And most people will suffer, you know, kind of an ego defeat if they do that.
So they don't because that's disagreeable.
What I'm saying is I'm just trying to avoid those pitfalls by not committing to a, an explanation
too early, you know, and that's, this is one of those areas I really love that study that they did
showing that that single joint kind of isometric contraction in the glute caused a change in the way
that the glute was used in a multi joint hip type exercise.
And I keep coming back to and I keep trying to fit it with other information.
That's a wait.
Well, I can't, you know, and at some point hopefully I will be able to because I think it's really
informative.
So the final question I have for you is when you look online and you look at the type of workouts
people are doing and you see glute workouts and you see workouts for other muscles.
Often what you might see is that glute workouts tend to be the highest volume workouts of any muscle
group.
And because obviously this squat or leg crease is gonna be different, but because a lot of the
exercise we've talked about there are contracted position exercises, is 1 able to actually use high
volume for those exercises for the glutes than some other muscles might be able to tolerate?
So in general, the lower body muscles tend to have a kind of mixed slow and fast fiber proportion,
roughly 5050.
There's not amazing data for all of them apart from the quads obviously, in which case there is
amazing data, but you know there's not generally amazing data for the fiber type proportions.
There's only a couple of studies for most muscle groups apart from the cords.
So we kind of say, okay, they're kind of 5050 ish probably, but again that can vary.
The upper body tends to be a lot more fast which kind of dominant.
So you tend to have a bigger problem with kind of fatigue ability.
So you've got this kind of fairly mixed fibre type proportion and also you've got some fairly chunky
voluntary activation deficits.
And voluntary activation deficits just mean you can't actually access your fastest twitch muscle
fibres.
And this is a really important point that most people, if not everybody who kind of talks about
fibre type proportions miss, which is that if I say to you that your biopsy measured fibre type
proportion is 5050, so you've got 50% fibre slow twitch fibres and 50% fast rich fibres, then you
then kind of work on that basis and you can say, OK, well, it's a fairly kind of balanced muscle.
But then if I say, oh, and by the way, you can't access the top 20% of the muscle because you've got
a voluntary activation deficit that's kind of like the top end spectrum.
You're now saying that that 20% is taking off 20% out of your 50% chunk of fast rich fibres.
You've actually only got 30% fast rich fibres accessible, so now it's 50 versus 30 rather than 50
versus 50.
So when you have a long activation deficit, you massively change the usable fibre type proportion of
the muscle and you make it very, very slow twitch, which is why when we use lower body muscles, they
actually don't get damaged that easily compared to upper body muscles.
So This is why the researchers use the quads as their archetype of the kind of difficult to damage
muscle and the biceps brachy is the archetype of the easily damaged muscle.
Now I know that there's a whole bunch of the Internet who run around going all the quads, you know,
kind of they take longer to recover because they're bigger and the biceps brachy, they, they're kind
of easy.
You can train those 14 times a day because they're really small and they recover easily.
That's exactly wrong because we literally have an entire body of literature devoted to studying
differences between muscles in terms of their recoverability.
And the quads are literally the muscle that we use as the example of muscles that recover quickly
and the biceps brachy example that we use as the muscle that recovers really, really slowly.
So how anybody doesn't know that is astonishing to me, but I guess they're just not looking at the
literature.
So basically, yeah, lower body going to recover pretty quickly because it's going to get relatively
minimal damage because of the high voluntary activation deficit, at least in untrained people.
You're going to see that chiseled away in kind of more well trained people and again, the fibre type
of portion being relatively balanced.
So yeah, I mean if you couple that knowledge with the fact that you're probably training the group
mostly with a contractor position, then yeah, I mean you can get it to tolerate a decent number more
sets then you would be able to get the biceps, triceps, pecs to kind of tolerate in the upper body.
So yeah, I think people can get away with doing a bit more volume.
Do they need to?
Absolutely not.
I mean, hyper is a muscle fiber specific phenomenon.
And I'm just going to keep saying that people are going to keep ignore, or at least they're going to
ignore the implications of it.
I say, Oh no, it's got, it's got, it's a bigger muscle.
Therefore I need to do more volume.
And like, just walk me through the logic of that, You know, how does having more muscle fibers in a
muscle change what each muscle fiber is doing?
They're independent structures like the family.
One could potentially argue that you could maybe require more total number of exercises.
There might be an opportunity.
That's totally justifiable because if you've got but reality is what you're then doing is you're
just you're just assuming that increases in size may mean increased complexity, you know, and that's
not actually true for the quad.
So but yeah, if you have increased complexity because of bigger size, then sure, you could argue
that therefore, but the reality is complexity tends to track function rather than or functions
rather than.
So like the quad extends the knee.
What else does it do?
OK, I'm stuck now.
You know, whereas you could say like, OK, what is the kind of vices Brecky do where you've got
shoulder flexion, you've got L reflexion, you've got supination, you've actually got a lot of
functionality there.
And therefore you end up with kind of variance in what the elbow flexors are doing.
And also you even end up with variants within individual biceps bracking muscles that we talked
about last week.
So reality is what you're really doing there is you're assuming that increased size tracks increased
complexity.
I'm not really sure that's necessarily true.
Or the very least, because you've got more volume to play with, you might have more opportunity to
if there were more complex function in the larger muscle to actually use those total exercise
numbers, right?
Like if you've got say something like the biases, Jackie, where obviously they damage.
Very easily.
That's the problem with the biases, Brachy.
You like, I want to do all these exercises and you're like, I can't because.
I do all them, yeah, yeah, yeah.
Best I can do a single set, but even then there's probably some more we could be doing.
Which is why we ended up talking about a full body AB split being probably better for most people in
that context.
Whereas when you're talking about glue and you've like got you want to do 3 exercises every session,
you probably can you know that's yeah you.
Can probably do everything you want for the glutes, but there's just not as much as you want to do,
is there?
Well, that's it.
And again, this is always going to be the problem in like not every muscle you can kind of get into
the sort of shoehorn into the workout structure that you necessarily want to do.
But I do think that people could do like the same glue workout three times a week and just do sets
and moderate loads.
Maybe if they're playing around with activation type stuff for I was talking about, or maybe like an
isometric or something, or maybe they're playing around with a pump exercise before and they could
do that and just about fit all of that into a single session every single time.
You know, I think that's probably probably do.
But what's going to happen if you start stacking set after set after set after set on top of it,
you're just getting access to fewer and fewer muscle fibers as you go through that work, whether
it's calcium I related team mechanisms or whether it's see an as fatigue mechanisms.
You're just losing access to the top end of the motenic pool by by going into those excessive sets.
And when you look at those responses of, you know, hypertrophy to training volume, those second,
third, fourth, fifth sets, I mean, they're really, really small kind of kind of extra growth
percentages compared to the first set.
I mean, we say that first set is 100%.
Then what is it you like 40% for the second set and then 22 for the third one?
I mean, like already third set is just like 1/5 of the size of your first set.
I mean like, what am I even doing by doing that third set?
What's the point, you know?
So I think one or two sets makes the most sense in that in that context.
And again, that's why I would push unilateral.
If you want to do something that takes up more time and kind of gives you a better effect,
unilateral is the way to go.
Not in the case of it I was explaining, but you know.
No, but I think like an interesting outline could be say a cluster for the hip Strauss or glute
Ridge and then doing single sets of the sated abduction and the single leg leg Crest.
That's something I quite like.
And you might get no two sets worth of stimulus with the hip stress that way, provided that you can
use a heavy enough load and it doesn't destroy one's hips.
But that's the way I would normally look at volumizing an exercise like that.
Yeah.
I mean, there's, there's a definitely valid options.
I think there's that's, that's, that's the way to go.
But again, I mean, if you like doing three of these workouts a week, every single week, then I don't
think volumizing is necessary, no.
No, no.
But if you want to get a second set worth it is interesting.
When I do program glutes like this, I don't recall ever really having clients who complain about
recoverability when we're doing this three times per week.
Whereas other muscles I do get clients, you know, they'll always be some clients who you know, even
if we do one or two sets of a particular muscle, some clients won't be able to recover big glutes.
I do find not really a recoverability.
Issue.
No, I mean in all honesty, you know, I've only ever found the adoptive Magnus to be my lower body
muscle.
It's the limiting factor if I do if I do squats and I haven't done them before recently.
I mean, at this point in my life, I'm highly enlightened to ever do squats again.
I think like just so much is single leg press for me is definitely the way to go.
But you know, I know if I were to go and do some squats, I would feel it in my doctor Magnus
following day and I'd be definitely uncomfortable.
Other than that, most I don't really find any kind of issues in the lower body.
Upper body I think is a different story.
I think that strict fiber proportion definitely for me makes it a much more kind of difficult kind
of problem solved.
Yeah, definitely.
I do find hamstrings a challenge.
If I'm doing them three times a week, I can do single sets, but as soon as I add any more to that.
Sure, yeah.
OK, great.
Any other pills?
Yeah, There was one thing I wanted to mention that I forgot to add in when we were talking about the
seated hip abduction machine.
So obviously there's some people who don't like it.
There's some people who say they find it uncomfortable.
And I'm like, OK, well then you're going to have to find something that isn't uncomfortable and work
with that instead.
And I don't know what that would be.
And sometimes, you know, and, and just to be clear, it's not my responsibility to find that I'm not
like the exercise creation guy, you know, I'm the muscle Physiology guy.
So like, OK, I can tell you how these things work, but you know, don't come asking me for the
replacement exercise for the, you know, the sole gym exercise that we have available for that
particular muscle region.
So you know, I'm not ashamed to say that it's not my area of expertise to come up with creative
solutions.
Seems to just not care about it.
It took me a while to work this out because for about two years I'd come to you and I'd expect you
to have these, you know, Frankenstein sort of versions of exercises that would perfectly target this
little region of a muscle.
And you just, it seemed it was like you'd never paid any attention to it.
You just.
Didn't very care about it.
Yeah, it's very much the kind of, I think that this is the dislocation between when people and I get
this a lot in my messages, when people send me a message and I can see from the question that they
think they are putting me in a kind of box that they have labeled and decided what they think I am.
And I'm not that.
So they they think that I'm this and therefore they send me a question that's geared to that kind of
person.
I just ignore it because I'm like, I'm not that kind of person.
You're basically telling me the same story.
You're saying that you kind of put me in a box and decided I was that thing.
And then when you ask me a question that that kind of person would answer in that kind of way, and
you got a completely different answer, you started to realize that isn't the way that my brain
works.
After I got, you know, effectively no answer back about 17 times, I eventually worked out.
OK, I mean, got there eventually, but I think that's that's very, very important observation about
human nature.
We tend to pigeonhole other people and label them as that's what what we think they are.
And I think if you kind of, if people are labeling me as, you know, A and other fitness influencer
who talks about science, they are going to trip up badly when they try to interact with me and they
are going to misunderstand what it is that I'm doing here.
I think if they actually just read the FAQ, they'll quickly realise I'm doing something completely,
100% different.
I'm not saying that you didn't read the FAQ.
You know, if you just read the FAQ, most people will figure out what it is that I'm trying to do
here and understand that, yeah, there's going to be stuff that I am not going to commit to becoming
an expert in because I need to devote my energy to other stuff that I'm good at.
And there's a small number of things that I'm really, really good at.
And I'm going to do those things to the exclusion and everything else.
I mean, I told you, I think when we had this conversation privately a long time ago, I said to you,
look, just read the kind of like Sherlock Holmes stuff.
You know, that's another example of somebody who just devotes their life to a particular thing that
other people aren't really interested in and or peripherally are interested in.
Or they're interested in the output, the benefit they're interested in that he can catch criminals.
They're not interested in how he actually does it fictitious character, even though he is.
So basically, you know, there's a famous kind of episode or kind of paragraph in the original books
where Watson discovers that Sherlock doesn't actually know that the Earth goes around the sun.
He just doesn't know that.
Why doesn't he know that?
He doesn't know it because he wasn't relevant to catching criminals.
And so he's literally just devoted his entire kind of kind of focus of it, all of his learning on
things that matter for his goals.
And that's the same approach that you'll get with people like me who've just decided that this batch
of things is going to be what they're interested in and everything else can can kind of just swing.
And you are therefore going to ask me questions that are important to you and they aren't important
to me because I'm just like, well, that isn't what I'm here to do.
And if you assume I am here to do that thing, then you're going to be putting me in a box that I'm
not actually in anyway.
So I was talking about something could be different.
I was talking about how some people don't like hip abduction machine because it's uncomfortable.
And you mentioned another example of the hip thrust being, sorry, the glute bridge being
uncomfortable.
And it's like, well, you're going to need to find a replacement exercise for that.
And I'm not the person who's going to be able to help you do that.
So go and, you know, kind of talk to somebody who's more creative about exercise kind of variations
than me.
Fine.
But what I do want to mention is that if it's uncomfortable and you don't want to do it, fine.
But don't tell me that the exercise doesn't work because you don't like it.
And that's something that I've seen happen with the hip abduction.
So people have said, Oh no, no, no, I don't like it.
And also it's not a good exercise because it actually only trains the piriformis.
It doesn't train the glue acts.
I'm like, hang on a minute, walk through the logic there.
You're saying that because the piriformis and some of the other deep external rotator muscles have
better leverage than the upper glute Max, which they do for seated hip abduction, then you're saying
that those muscles are going to do the movement and the upper loop Max is not well in.
If you follow that same logic, then you would say that the posterior delt does sagittal plane
shoulder extension, which is nonsense.
OK.
New mechanical matching tells us that the muscles that have best leverage will get called upon
thirst.
And when you get to very high levels or maximum levels of activation for those muscles, not
necessarily maximal in terms of 100% but maximal kind of in terms of what you can do, you will move
activation across 2 muscles that have less good leverage.
So in the sagittal plane pulling exercise, you get posterior delt is going to be called upon 1st and
then when it almost maxes out to whatever degree that is stopped at, I'm not really sure how that
works, but you're going to end up getting that involvement, especially through that up to the
maximum level there it can do.
And then you move on to other stuff and you literally just kind of go down a sequence of going,
okay, that, then that, then that, then that.
Okay.
So apply that to the seated hip abduction.
Yes, piriformis, another kind of small muscles, very, very small muscles with very, very good
leverage.
They are going to get used very to a very high level of activation.
And then you're going to move on to stuff like the upper glute Max and you're going to get a pretty
decent activation of that because you didn't actually have to send very much the piriformis to Max
it out.
So the idea that just because a tiny muscle has amazing leverage means that it's going to stop
another muscle from working is not necessarily true.
In fact, it's not.
The only time that you're going to get a muscle stopping another muscle get used is if the muscle
that you are activating is really big.
So yeah, in the case of the sagittal plane pull, once you've got into the thoracic land and you
start using up all of your central motor cran to activate the thoracic land, Yeah, you're not now
going to get onto the lumbo pelvic lap because you actually have used up pretty much all the central
motor command doing the activate muscles that you've already used.
But you're not going to get that with a tiny little muscle like the always.
So by all means, if an exercise is uncomfortable to you, then don't do it.
Do something different and find somebody whose expertise extends to excise creation that will help
you figure that out.
But please don't say that the exercise doesn't work because you know a small muscle is being used
instead of the muscle that I'm actually trying to use, because that's nonsense.
That's just not the way voluntary activation deficits or new mechanical matching actually work.
Yeah, that's helpful.
That's a good grant.
I didn't even know that was an argument people made.
I know people complain about the seeded abduction, but I didn't know that they then tacked on.
And yeah, just to be as I'm saying, to be 100% clear, if it is uncomfortable or if you don't like it
for whatever reason, then don't do it.
Yeah, some people do get nerve pain, static nerve pain doing it, yeah.
Absolutely, totally logical response to that situation, but it doesn't mean that the exercise
doesn't work for other people, because it does.
Yeah.
And technically it would still work for you, just there's a, there's there's.
A problem you have to overcome, yeah.
OK, great, that was it.
Now the pearls and wisdom about cleats.
No, nothing.
I think we're done.
So hopefully people will find most of that useful, some of that entertaining, and maybe even some of
it insightful.
And maybe it'll change the questions.
You can need DMS and you won't get any more exercise questions.
Now a reminder guys that if you jump onto our profiles on social media and click our links, we will
have information up about the certification.
And I didn't mention this at the start, but I will mention it now.
Make sure you do sign up to that e-mail notification because we are going to have a launch offer
when we do officially launch.
So hop on our link, fill in the e-mail, that's all you need to give us, nothing else.
And we will be sending out a launch offer in the next few weeks.
Thank you guys, as always, and I hope you'll join us again next week for another episode.