Episode: 054 Strength vs Hypertrophy: Is Powerbuilding the Solution?
URL: https://open.spotify.com/episode/7cAMDMXM4goDu9dnl90tzs
Published: 2026-06-01
================================================================================

Welcome back, thank you for joining us for another episode.
And can you hear that there's nothing?
For the first time in weeks, I have no nose, no birds, no nosy neighbors, no construction work.
It's a good day.
Sunny blue skies and no noise.
So no distractions today.
Happy days.
Hopefully you guys are no non distraction distraction for you as well with a cup of coffee, just
like me.
Chris, how are you doing today?
I'm doing well.
Thanks, Jake.
Wonderful, wonderful.
So we tease you guys with an announcement that was coming last week and here we are.
True to our word, we have an announcement for you guys and that is we are launching a Train Heroic
training group.
So if you guys don't know what Train Heroic is, it's a platform where we're able to program workout
routines and you guys can join and be part of the group, part of the community.
You can interact with each other, interact with me.
You know, you can get like feedback, you can get technique feedback, all that kind of stuff.
And we're going to be programming workouts in that group.
Now it is a hypertrophy past and present training group.
So what we're doing is we're going to be selecting a workout that probably we've covered here in one
of these podcasts and we'll be updating it to be kind of as optimal as possible.
And it's going to be so it's a silver era inspired as close as possible to a true silver era
routine.
And as part of that, it's going to be something that you guys can do in a silver era style gym.
So we're going to have, you know, barbells, dumbbells, pull up bar, a bench, a squat cage, and
that's really all you're going to need.
Why are you laughing?
What do you?
What do you need to laugh?
Did they really?
Did they really have pull up bars in the silver era?
I see no evidence for this.
Unfortunately, the plan today also doesn't have a pull up bar, but there have been some.
There have been some anyway.
So we're talking silver era type gym.
I will men, when we program this, I will mention some like substitutions if you have access to a
cable, you know, might give you guys some options if you want to do that as an alternative.
But we are setting this up to be a routine that you can follow in I I guess like a well cripped home
gym.
Now the first plan is it's all written.
It is ready to go and we're starting workout one next Monday.
So that is June 8 and it is, I'll tell you guys now, it is a Reg Park inspired plan.
So it's not in, in fact we're talking about Reg Park today, but it is not this plan.
It is actually quite different to this style plan we're talking about today.
It is a Reg Park single sets routine.
So that will be launching.
In fact it is live now.
You guys can sign up, but you won't be able to do the workout.
And I mean, you can technically do the workout, but workout one will be set for next week.
So the link for that will be in both of our BIOS.
I'll pop it in my story as well.
So when you're listening to this, I'm sure you'll be able to find it.
But we are super excited.
And I do want to mention we've had one person sign up already.
He was super excited to find out that he'd stumbled across the secret that we hadn't launched yet
and asked me to give him a shout out.
So I forget what his name is, unfortunately.
I'm sorry, but welcome aboard anyway.
I'm super excited to join you guys with that to make sure you have a look at that one.
Now today we I mentioned are talking about Reg Park and we are doing one of his multi joint, multi
joint multi set.
Although technically I think every excise bar 1 is a multi joint exercise as well.
And I wanted to talk about Reg.
I know we've talked about him before.
In fact, I think he's the most common frequent appearance on this show.
But today we're talking about power building and I just couldn't go past Reg.
Reg first bodybuilder to bench 500 lbs.
I just had to mention him and he specifically talked about they didn't call it power building, but
he specifically talks about routines for people who want to get strong, people who want to, you
know, do weight lifting.
And he's got a lot of courses on this topic.
And I'm going to talk about one of these in just a moment.
But what's really interesting, and I didn't want to give this example because we've talked about
this sort of work out from him in a past episode, but in his, I believe it was his bulking course,
power and bulk course.
That's what he called it.
He actually had routines that were written for both weight lifters and bodybuilders.
And what's really interesting is to compare in contrast, what he did differently in those two
demographics and mostly just came down to exercise selection.
There was a couple of repetitions that would change, but really what he would do is he would take
the weightlifting course and he would just turn, he would just chapter change some of those
exercises into bodybuilding exercises.
And I think it's really cool experiment just to to look at that and see, OK, what exercises are you
using the silver era that you're identifying as bodybuilding exercises compared to weightlifting
exercises.
So that's kind of cool.
If anyone has access to that book, it is an interesting read.
But what we're talking about today is a plan that came from his Mr. Universe courses.
And so this is a bulking routine which he talked about, I think he called it, he called it bulking
power.
He called it a power routine.
Bulking routines were very similar in the silver era.
They tended to be more kind of strength focused multi joint exercises.
But he did call this a power power course.
And what we have here is AI guess you could say like a condensed routine.
He only did 8 exercises.
He often would do more exercises than that in a routine.
And the eight exercises consisted of the barbell overhead press, which is interesting because he
actually did a lot behind the network, but he was actually just doing a standard overhead press.
And he would do that for he started with three sets of it and he suggested you could increase set
number over time and go up to five sets.
So three to five sets of five repetitions.
He then did a squat to bench, so not full depth.
He would just, you know, come down to bench height actually like unload in in the sense of like, you
know, sit on the bench and then stand back up.
And he would do that for three to five sets of five repetitions.
And as everyone in the Silviero did, he would pair that with with pullovers.
Then we have a bench press off boxes.
So this is like AI guess like a, what do you call it?
Bench bench from pins.
We would call that today.
And so you're actually starting in the bottom position of the bench.
I don't think that would've been all the way off the chest.
It would've been a little bit above the chest.
But starting in that bottom position again, three sets, up to five sets of five repetitions.
And then weighted dips again, three to five sets of five repetitions.
And then stiff leg off, stiff leg deadlift off boxes.
So this again would be like a a rat pool nowadays.
Again, three to five sets of five repetitions.
And then I bent over barbell row, three to five sets of five and then a barbell swing curl, which is
like a cheating, sort of like a cheating curl.
He would kind of lean back as he as he did the concentric.
And then this was also done for three to five sets of fi.
Yeah, three to five sets of five repetitions.
And then finally a toe raise with partners.
So a calf raise, a standing calf raise, six sets of 30 repetitions.
Again, this is where you've got the person on your back.
We've told about this exercise before.
I think it's just a loading issue, but there you have it.
So 8 exercises, 9 if you include the pullover heavy work, 5 reps multi joint exercises.
Chris, what's standing out to you?
So, yeah, I mean, there's there's some statements that I make every time on these kind of programs.
And then there's a couple of other interesting bits and pieces.
It's in terms of exercise selection.
I'm, I'm interested in the, the fact that the squat and the bench are both concentric, kind of not
concentric only, but they obviously have that they're, they're, they're losing the straight shorting
cycle in both cases.
And the bench press obviously actually starting off the bench off the off the boxes.
Sorry.
Interestingly, when I was doing, when I was focusing on the three power lifts, I actually did almost
all my benching off as concentric starting points.
And I did it as pin presses.
And I spent a lot of time messing around with putting plywood down because I had a power rack And I
would put plywood down underneath the bench so I could get the exact height, because I could stack
plywood kind of underneath the bench and I'd get exact height so that when I was in my bench
position, the pins would be literally pretty much perfect.
So the Barber was an exact starting point, as it would be.
And you can do that.
I mean, when you're you're encouraged, Jim, you can mess around like that.
It's really interesting that he's done that for both of those lifts there.
So he's obviously thinking about that as a reason.
Now, I've kind of talked about before why I don't think it's a big deal.
I don't think it actually makes that much difference in terms of the Physiology.
It does change the bio mechanics very slightly.
It's not so much in the bench press actually.
It does change it more so in the squat.
So it tends to change how far you can sit back and it tends to change exactly what the bar path
looks like.
But anyway, for me, the driver was more about that when you are, when you're benching, if you're
thinking about re racking the bar at the top position, then you're thinking about something extra
that you shouldn't really need to be thinking about.
If you're focusing on actually getting stronger.
If you're if you're focusing on actually doing the lift and re racking the bar at the top position,
OK, fine.
That is a necessary, necessary kind of thing that you need to do.
But you don't actually need to necessarily do it if you're being handed off the weight, which is if
you've kind of got somebody else helping me And you don't need to do it if you're using boxes like
he's talking about here or if I was doing it in it with pins.
And actually that just removes an extra coordination element that you then don't have to think
about, which I think is beneficial not from any physiological sense.
Well, arguably it is a physiological sense because it's removing that kind of requirement in your
brain that's thinking about that thing.
It means you don't have to do that coordination part, which is potentially detracting from you being
able to do the lift, you know, the rest of the lift, you know, successfully.
So anyway, just kind of minor things that I think is interesting there, but.
So from a perspective, if you look at that bench, there's not, yeah, nothing different than if you
were starting.
Yeah, OK.
From a, from a like what people talk about from a dead stop, which is basically just removing the
straight shortening cycle.
It doesn't really do anything.
You know, neither the straight shortening cycle being present nor being absent really changes the
hypertrophy effects.
And honestly, I don't think it really changes the maximum strength effects either.
So I don't think it really affects the power side, power building side or the I put, you know, power
building, power being strength really and building being the hypertrophy side.
I really don't think it changes either of those things where changing the strict shortening cycle
does change.
Just where removing or adding the strict shortening cycle does change things is in high velocity
movements.
That's where things really change.
But in the context of, of this, what we're talking about today, I think it makes any difference.
But it's just, I just find it interesting that he's got around 2 lifts, you know, and that's, that's
an interesting point.
Really the, the kind of the comments that I would make all the time would just simply be back work
is odd because, you know, we've got a bent over row and then we've got the kind of pullover, which
isn't really a back exercise.
It just kind of gets a little bit of back involved.
So, you know, obviously we would want, you know, kind of wide grip pull ups and close grip rows or
something like that, probably in a more stable format like a incline bench or something, just
supported row.
I don't really like bent over rows.
I think that most people end up just treating them as a kind of horizontal power clean, I don't
think.
And the people who don't are kind of doing a balancing exercise.
Yeah, that's for me the problem I have with bent over rows that either you fall into one trap or you
fall in the other trap, one or the other, either you put 130 kilos on the bar and you're basically
doing a horizontal power clean.
You know, that's, I've been there, done that, got the T-shirt right.
Opposite end of the spectrum, you've got some guy basically 50 kilos on the bar and he's kind of
standing there and it's looking like a kind of the most delicate kind of balancing exercises, trying
to keep his torso perfectly horizontal all the time.
And again, neither of the neither of those goes to extremes doing anything.
I've got a I've got a secret, which I haven't told you, but you've probably intuited because of some
comments I've made over the last few weeks.
And that is I had been playing with been over grows lately, but I have been doing them in a Smith
machine and I quite enjoy them in a Smith machine.
I I hate them.
Just standard barbell.
I did years of that and not, not not going back to that, but in a Smith machine, it takes out that
bouncing act that you're talking about.
And I mean, I'm only a few weeks into playing with it, but so far I feel like the coordination's not
been an issue, balancing has not been an issue, and I'm just using that as my sad little row at the
moment.
And your torso is not bouncing up and down.
No, I'm not.
I'm not loading up with 130 kilos, no.
That's the issue.
I mean, The thing is, you know, as, as people know, I do, I, I do a diff, I do a podcast, another
podcast with Rob Mauser and we talk about athletic stuff a lot of the time or most of the time.
And, and one of the things that, you know, we, we come back to is that a lot of SNC at the moment
has people standing, doing exercises.
Like for example, they might be standing facing a cable machine and they're doing kind of a single
arm row facing a cable stack.
And we're looking at that going, what do you think you're doing?
What, what purpose does this exercise have?
And they like the, the, you know, the SNC code she's written like this entire kind of essay on what
they think is going on.
And it's all just nonsense.
You know, there's nothing happening, you know, not that actually creates adaptations that will be
useful for the sport.
You get better at that particular exercise because you learn to stabilize it.
And that's a, you know, kind of a skill that you develop as a result of practicing that thing.
It doesn't really transfer because none of the adaptations that transfer actually, you know, are
happening.
And that's kind of why I think it's really important to focus on adaptations because it allows you
to discern whether or not something like that is having an effect on it.
Really that that exercise that we were just talking about there, the the bent over row with 50 kilos
on the bar where it's just kind of a balancing exercise and trying to keep your torso perfectly
straight all the time.
And am I that forms perfectly into that category for me.
You know, it's just one of those what I don't, I think Rob's got some rude words that he would use
to describe it, but basically just as a kind of pointless balancing exercise.
It doesn't really do anything.
But as I say, I think the opposite end of the spectrum is, is probably equally bad.
I'm really negative on bent over rows.
I don't think they do really anything that people want them to do because either they're moving too
fast or they're moving the whole body around, or they're balancing and stabilizing and nothing's
really happening.
And I don't really see a way of finding the middle ground because you either end up pushing in One
Direction or the other when you start trying to make progress.
Yeah, you do.
And I do wonder because a lot of the time when we look at these old workout plans, they're using
them in the transverse plane and that's going to naturally limit the load that they're using and
it's going to take out a little bit of that sort of balancing stability demand.
And so from that perspective, I think, oh, you know, maybe if you're not going stupid with momentum
and body English and you're using a wider grip, maybe it's not as bad of an exercise for that
purpose.
But then how much ladder we're getting and it's being used as a ladder exercise.
So yeah, it is a bit of a but.
The thing is, I think if people want a really good rowing variation in a carriage type gym then the
inclined dumbbell chest sported row is pretty hard to be hard to beat.
If they want a decent row in a commercial gym then there's a couple of good options.
Most of the time if they want to use a barbell, then I would use.
I would set up a bench on boxes and I would use a barbell while lying on the bench and I'd pull to
the bench.
Yeah, yeah.
What I figure what what do you call that?
You have to elevate a bench otherwise it doesn't work.
Well this whole you can get like a quick inside.
Benches or that high, you can, you can, but you can also just elevate that.
Also just elevate that, yeah.
Yeah, depending on the bench, if you've got like a crossbeam underneath, it might get in the way.
Yeah, and I've got long arms, which makes it hard for me as well.
But in the in our new train Heroic, we do not have a bent over row in this phase.
However, I have suggested it as an alternative if people don't want to do the incline dumbbell row
that is a.
Primary choice, yeah, there's no, there's no possibility of there being barbell bent over rows in
any program that I'm associated happen.
Yeah, really very, very negative on them despite their popularity in the silver era anyway.
So it is interesting that we've got we've got some stiff leg deadlifts in this in this program here.
And of boxes as well.
So that's.
Interesting again that that kind of starts to make it into yeah, box boxes does make it more of a
rag pull, which I'm I'm I'm I'm not so much of a fan of.
I think that so I'm I'm kind of in that zone where I think that if you take a little bit of range of
motion off a stiff leg deadlift, it is really good idea.
I think that, you know, just maybe a couple of inches off the ground instantaneously makes the
excise so much more comfortable and doesn't really lose you a lot.
I actually think that works for deadlifts in my January as well.
But I think that when you turn it into a rec pool by actually using boxes and you kind of elevate it
like a foot off the ground, and I think it really kind of starts to make it a different animal
completely and it starts to become an upper body excise rather than a lower body exercise.
Now I believe he does talk about the benefit from a back perspective and I think from memory he does
say that This is why he does it off boxes is so you can use heavier loads.
But also you would think this is.
Going honestly, I'd rather do a proper back exercise and a shrug.
Sure, sure, sure.
Sure.
Yeah.
I mean, he's using this as a trap work, I imagine.
Yeah, but you're also going to get more of a direct hamstring stimulus doing it in this short and
range of motion.
Then you would be doing full drum.
And this is the hamstring exercise, the only hamstring exercise in the program.
Well, yes and no.
Yes, if, if again, if you can keep your form absolutely nailed on.
But if you look at most people doing heavy rack pulls, they tend to end up kind.
Of with the yeah.
Turning it into an upper body exercise.
Even so they bring their hips forward and they they don't give the proper hinge position.
So again, I think that a proper stiff leg, elevate it slightly off the ground, maybe like just put a
weight plate underneath it.
If that's not sacrilege.
You know, that tends to be my preferred way of doing it.
And I think that's fantastic, absolutely fantastic exercise.
Yes, you're right.
It doesn't give you as much hamstrings.
It gives you more adduct, the Magnus.
But in the context of a garage gym, I think it works pretty well.
And in terms of using this as like more trap work and everything else, you would just say, well use
a different exercise.
Yeah.
So I mean, I mean, we'll get on to how we might build power building routines later on in this
podcast, I guess.
But if I was just looking at this and going, OK, you know, it's designed as a power building
routine, How how would I tweak it?
Well, I changed the Rep ranges.
I don't.
I'm not convinced that hammering away three to five sets of five reps is the right answer.
I think that that's toppy in terms of volume with all these exercises.
And I don't think you necessarily need to be as high as fives all the time either.
I've got no arguments with our red press or obviously squats and bench presses.
Dips, obviously, I'm a fan of stiffler deadlifts.
I would just move it down to the close to the floor.
Bento rose.
I would replace that with a wide grip pull ups, weighted, obviously.
Honestly, I'm not.
I'm kind of on the fence about whether I'd have calf work in a power boarding routine, but again,
that's personal preference.
And again, would I have curls in the routine?
If I've got better pulling exercises, I'd probably want a shrug in there, to be honest.
So I might have to, I might have to have a shrug instead of the curls if I was just kind of
switching things out.
But again, that's just what your perspectives are on a power building routine.
But fundamentally, I really like it as as like, I mean, again, like we always say, this is so much
better than anything else you're going to find.
I in one of my other groups at the moment, my gains maxing group, I'm doing you a method routine
where I'm alternating a like single set day, which is a little bit more inspired by like a Steve
Reeves kind of method where there's multiple exercises per muscle group, each trying to buy a
different region and each done for a single set.
And I'm alternating that.
So it's full body AB with a more multi joint focus strength focused routine similar to this.
And and I would say it's more inspired by your edge park and some of those things you just mentioned
there.
I mean, for me, I, I'm looking at what I've programmed and it's very similar to this, but I've taken
out the road.
I've turned it into a wide grip pull up like you'd said.
And I had, I did keep calves in there, but I did struggle with that because I would prefer initially
when I wrote that I took calves out.
But then really if you're doing a full body AB in that, in that sort of context, you're getting
cars, you know, 1 1/2 times a week on average.
It's, it's a difficult, I find that a difficult bouncing act with a routine like this.
And then putting in like the two joint muscles dips is an interesting one for triceps.
But it does become, you know, where's your priority there?
Do you need to hit every single muscle or a prioritizing more of a, you know, I guess like a
condensed routine where maybe you don't have direct biceps work, you don't have direct triceps long
head work, you don't have direct gastroc work.
You know, it's a bit of a what's what's most important to you, you know?
I think you've, you've, you've raised a really important issue there, which is that if we were kind
of building something from scratch, we would probably use full body AB rather than full body A,
which is what Reggie is doing.
And immediately that then allows you to focus on a slightly wider range of exercises and, you know,
gives you some more freedom in terms of putting things in the program.
So you can kind of alternate between weighted chins and heavy rows and you know, you're doing them 1
1/2 times a week.
And that that's really, really, really effective, I think in a power building scenario.
And then you can then you've got a little bit more mileage on the set side of things.
So if you actually wanted to go a bit further and say, do you know, four sets of two or something on
or five sets of two, even on an exercise, you can do that because you've got space.
But it also allows the freedom to then have things like a shrug and a curl and maybe some calf
raises.
And it doesn't feel like you're kind of in the gym for like.
Yeah, exactly.
And like you said, five sets is pretty Toby.
So for me, when I would program this kind of method, I'll do three sets.
I've programmed 4:00 to 6:00.
If I was going to do more sets, I'd be dropping those.
Reputations down.
For me, 5 sets of two would be a proper strength program.
It wouldn't be a power loading program.
It'd be leading away from that, definitely.
OK.
So anything, any other adjustments you would make to this routine or do we jump into just how, how
would we?
Honestly, I think it's a great routine and with a couple of tiny tweaks on the excise selection, it
could be usable today.
Absolutely 100%.
But yeah, I mean, when we were talking about doing power building, I suggested that we could think
about it in a systems kind of way and just talk about that now and see whether it works.
But the way I think about it is that with powerbuilding, you kind of trying to hit two goals at the
same time.
You're trying to hit maximum strength in a couple of exercises or maybe in a transferable way for a
sport like strongman or something.
That's probably a great example.
Strongman maybe something that maybe people who are doing powerbuilding could be quite interested
in.
So it's probably probably better than, you know, something as targeted as powerlifting, but you
know, OK, so you know, we're thinking about strength sports type participants who want to kind of do
a power building type routine.
You're hitting maximum strength as a goal on some exercises or movement patterns.
And then the upper end of the spectrum then got the building side, which is the the hypertrophy
side.
So you have these two kind of very, very closely related goals.
Ultimately, you could kind of say, well, a maximum strength routine would look like this.
If you went all the way up to the maximum strength end of the spectrum, it would look like this.
You go to the upper end of the spectrum and go a bodybuilding routine would look like that.
And you've got these two kind of extremes.
And you say, OK, so if you were saying that, you know, the maximum strength side of things or the
powerlifting sport that you're participating in or a strong man or whatever, that was your actual
kind of primary purpose.
And you were just saying like a little bit more hypertrophy, then you could kind of construct a
program that would start from that point and then move a little bit towards the hypertrophy
direction.
The opposite is also true.
You could start out with a bodybuilding routine that you think is nailed down and you could take a
little bit of a step towards the maximum strength side of things.
And you could do that.
And then you could kind of just try and construct something, which is what most people automatically
do, which is like, well, I'm going to do something in the middle.
And like, the reason I'm mentioning this system or continuum is to try and get people to think
before they do that because most people go, most people will go, oh, I've got these two goals that I
want to achieve.
I want to do this kind of strength sport.
I want to get stronger in this particular lift.
But at the same time, I also want to, you know, kind of build my physique and like, OK, but are you
genuinely telling me that both both of those goals are exactly the same priority too?
And most people are not 5050 on their priorities on on two goals simultaneously.
Most time it's 7525 or, you know, you know, there's like a disparity.
Like, OK, so unless you genuinely are 50, you wouldn't just kind of create a amalgamated program
that does half and half.
You would start at one end and you would take a step towards the middle.
And I think we've, I've just literally recorded a podcast like this about athletic performance with
Rob, and we took exactly the same systematic approach because it's like you have to decide where on
that continuum you're sitting, I think.
So I think it'd be really interesting if we kind of just argued about those three different options
rather than just kind of arguing about one option, which we'd like best to try and kind of pitch an
option in each of those three spaces.
Yeah, yeah.
I think an interesting thing in the context of powerlifting, bodybuilding, combined powerbuilding,
is even if you did take a middle ground, it's not like you're necessarily getting 5050, like you're
not getting half of there's so much.
Synthesis between the two goals I.
Agree.
Yeah.
So you might be able to get 80% of both.
Yeah.
And I think also if you are doing say for example, you are competing in the strength board like
powerlifting or Olympic weightlifting even or strongman, I think there is a decision that you have
to make, which is am I seeking hypertrophy to suit my sport exclusively or am I seeking hypertrophy
that does not suit my sport?
Because I genuinely am taking a step towards building out my physique in a way that looks more
bodybuilding like.
And I think that's a really interesting point that has to be taken into account on that, on that
level as well.
Because ultimately if you're saying you know, I'm, I'm building my physique, sport, my sport, then
program's going to look quite different.
Yeah, I think, you know, someone's competing as a power lifter or in a in a strength sport.
That's not bodybuilding.
That adds a whole extra layer of boundary conditions onto this programming.
You know, then we do need to be aware of body weight and you know what you're explaining there.
So I think maybe the best way of looking at it would be, let's say someone's not competing.
I mean, even if they're all competing in bodybuilding, that's going to add another layer as well,
right?
So.
I think ultimately the way that I, the way that Rob and I talked about this is that if you are
competing, then you can't do this.
Yeah.
I just, you can't have two goals if you're competing.
If you're competing, then you have a goal.
I mean, that's all there is to it.
If you, if you're competing and you've got two goals, why are you competing?
That makes no sense.
The whole point of competing is to do the best you can.
Why would you have?
Why would you kind of make your life harder by trying to do something else at the same time?
There's nonsense unless you are, unless part of your sport is about being able to do those two
things at the same time.
And that's a totally separate question, but if you're competing in spirit board, then you're not
going to take on.
Which kind of was for some of these Silver Arrow guys early on you know there was a component of
weightlifting with the bodybuilding and that's why we do see such high overlap with some of these
guys.
Sure.
OK, So do we, do we look at each of those perspectives and and I.
Think, I think we should try and answer the question on all three points on the continuum because I
think and I actually think it's going to, I think it's going to be an interesting kind of process
because I think it's going to pull us away from the power rolling program that we've just looked at,
which I actually like quite a lot.
Yeah.
OK.
So which one should we start with?
Let's start with the body rolling end of the spectrum where because that's actually the easiest 1.
So if you start with a really solid body rolling program and you take a step towards making that
more like a power building program, what's going to happen?
What's the easiest thing that a bodybuilder can do?
If they're following A, let's assume that they are following A three times a week, either full body
A or full body AB type program.
So we're assuming that they kind of know how to program.
They're doing a very wide range of exercises because that, you know, is going to give them maximum
coverage and they are focusing a lot on the machine stuff, they're focusing a lot on single joint
stuff.
And, you know, they've built a, you know, good physique doing that and now they want to take a step
towards being able to compete in not compete, compete.
But you know, they're moving towards the idea of, you know, participating in some strength type
competitions.
Thinking about that in the future.
Maybe they're not obviously playing it immediately, but they're thinking about that for the future.
And so they're looking to start building some skill in those areas.
So how are we going to modify one of those programs to allow them to move in that direction
overtime?
Yeah, yeah.
So disagree hash what that that program is probably looking like at the moment.
If they're just right in that bodybuilding camp, then I would assume it's looking something like
like you said, either full body A or full body AB, probably single sets, probably, you know, a dozen
or more exercises per workout.
You know, probably 1 exercise per muscle region biasing different regions.
There's probably not as much of a emphasis on Rep scheme or like repetition range.
I'd say they're probably saying look anywhere between sort of four to 12/5 to 15, anything like that
depending on availability, equipment and whatever.
Yeah.
And then like you said, there's going to be more machine based work in that.
And so if we're going to take one step closer to the middle of saying, hey, let's get some some
powerlifting strength focus in this.
Probably the first thing that comes to mind for me there is going to be the excise selection side of
things and the machine side of things.
And maybe we need to distinguish here when we're talking about power in the power building side of
things, the power lifting side of things, are we, are we wedding ourselves to the power lifts or are
we just saying maximal strength is in expression?
Well, This is why I was so This is why I was being kind of inclusive with my.
Yeah, yeah.
Not.
Just about powerlifting.
Because the problem is that most of the time when the fitness community uses the word maximum
strength, they are talking nonsense.
They're absolutely talking nonsense because they are referencing a concept that doesn't exist
because they're literally describing.
I've made this criticism a number of times when when I hear a lot of strength coaches talk and SNC
coaches talking about maximum strength, the athletes maximum strength, I'm like, what?
What are you talking about?
They're not a computer Sprite.
They don't have like 10 points of strength, 11 points of stamina.
That's not real.
That's not what's going on here.
You know, tell me the exercise or the movement pattern that you are testing that strength in.
And that's and you can't, don't say leg strength because that's nonsense as well.
So the the problem is that you can, you can kind of you can kind of talk about like squat patterns
and hinge patterns to a degree.
And you can cut to about pressing and pulling and again, different directions and kind of movement
planes will change the exact level of strength that the athlete is capable of expressing.
But broadly speaking, if you've done a lot of squatting, then you have a strongman competition that
involves A squat type movement button, you can kind of be reasonably, you know, confident that
you'll be OK at that.
You know, it does transfer to that extent.
So, so I think what what we've kind of got to do is, is understand that, you know, maximum strength
is physiologically limited to the either the exercise or the movement pattern and you've got to know
what you're going to be doing in the sport in order to be able to prepare for that.
So, you know, strongman obviously has a wider variety of things that you're going to be done, but
generally speaking, it's going to be, you know, very close to squats or hinges or pulls or presses
most of the time, not all the time, but most of the time.
So I think the powerlifting side tends to give people a tunnel vision because they go, you know, oh,
strength just means my ability to squat that way in that power rack in that particular.
And that's not what strength means, you know?
Yeah.
OK.
So, so less of a focus on the particular competition style lift, but we're expecting that there's
going to be transferability to a squat pattern, a upper pushing style.
Yeah.
I think if we're, if we're if the if the, if the individual is starting from the very general
starting point of saying I've been a bodybuilder or recreational bodybuilder, it's probably the best
place to kind of describe it as they're not been competitive, but they've been recreational
bodybuilder following a great program and they're starting to just get interested in strength
sports.
And like I'm interested in maybe, you know, participating in a fun kind of local strongman
competition.
I've seen, you know, plenty of those and people just rock up and do that.
I mean, you know, and or maybe I'm interested in seeing whether I can do a bit of powerlifting in
the future.
Not the point that I'm making is that if you are setting out on competition track, if you're saying
I'm going to be competitive and that's my company, that's a totally different animal.
Don't talk about, you know, kind of power building in that context because it makes no sense because
if you've got a competitive goal that you want to achieve, then go and do that thing.
I mean, that's different.
What I'm saying is that someone's just getting interested in that area that's bought.
They want to move in that direction.
Then I think what you would start with is general kind of preparatory movement patterns that would
enable them to either go down the, you know, kind of powerlifting route or the strong memory or
whatever else that they wanted to do that involved those kind of situations.
OK, so, so how about this, What if I tell you what I'll do and then you you could take me.
Well, that's it.
So I would take that, that full body a, a, a multiple exercises per muscle region.
And I would normally program that says like 3 different exercises per muscle.
OK, so each muscle region is is getting biased.
Now if I'm taking a step towards middle, what I'm gonna do is I'm gonna turn that full body a, a, A
into an AB.
I'm gonna take those three different exercises per muscle region.
I'm gonna condense them down to 2 and I'm gonna have one multi joint exercise per muscle group.
That's going to be an overhead press and a pull up, a bent over row, whatever.
And I'll do 2 sets of that exercise instead of single sets.
And I'll keep one other exercise for that muscle group, which is by seeing a particular region as a
single set.
Probably the only other change I would make there would before us I had a wider range for
repetitions.
And now for that multi joint exercise per muscle group, I'm gonna try to reduce that down somewhere
between maybe 4 to 6, four to 8.
That's that's probably it in that first.
So your your kind of your, your kind of key exercises would be some kind of overhead press.
Overhead trash like a a bench, I'd have a pull up.
Yeah, you know, maybe it maybe a stiff like deadlift.
Yeah, a squat that would probably be like the the four.
Yeah, I think that's really solid approach.
I think that's, I mean, that's, that's going to be a put a big step actually in the right direction
and then they can focus on getting those numbers up over time and, you know, seeing how things go.
And yeah, I think that'll be a really a really solid, really solid strategy.
I'm just wondering if there's anything else that could could really be done, probably not and
maintain a kind of proximity to that end of the spectrum, to be honest.
So I mean, you're pretty much in exactly the same place that I was.
I was.
I was thinking also about excise order.
I was thinking about prioritising those kind of key lifts as being the first things that we would do
in each of the workouts.
So maybe you would have the bench press on one day and the press on the other day.
Maybe and then again squat on one day, stiff leg on the other and and then maybe you'd have two
different bullying exercises or something like that.
I don't know.
I mean that would that would be 3 kind of pretty chunky exercises at the beginning of each session
and then after that would be everything else.
I think that would probably probably be rounding it out quite.
Well, yeah, see that's interesting because that's that's then determining do you take one step
closer to that middle of the two goals, one step further away?
Because I would normally do the the a multi joint exercise to say the overhead press and then I'll
do the isolated shoulder exercise.
Yeah.
And that's keep me closer to the bodybuilding side.
Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.
But I think with it being so kind of with it being important to gain the skill in those situations,
I'd probably want to prioritize them earlier.
OK.
So that's landing us almost in the middle.
It is a big.
Step.
Actually it is a big step.
It is a big step.
Let's, let's, let's jump to the opposite end of the, of the, of the continuum and say, well, what
happens if you've got a powerlifter who's decided they're going to, or maybe not been competitive,
but they've been training as a power lifter?
Or actually, to be honest, if someone's been a little bit competitive, gone to some competitions and
then they've now decided to retire from that and just focus on bodybuilding.
But they want to carry on training as a powerlifter and they just want to add a little bit of some
extra bits and pieces around the edges.
So maybe they're actually doing an upper lower split.
Maybe they're doing, you know, bench twice a week and and squat deadlift.
Maybe they're only deadlifting once a week.
I don't know.
But they're doing like lower body stuff, squad deadlift twice a week, which I think actually is a
really, really great way of doing things because it, it gives you the ability to focus on the, the,
the kind of the, the skill stuff that you want to work on, you know, twice a week, first in the
workout.
So what would we then look for there if they were following that kind of routine and wanted to to
take a step towards bodybuilding?
So presumably they're doing, let's say, what, five sets of double s or something along those lines.
Yeah, exactly.
And like you said, upper, lower.
And then they might have, So maybe they'll have the the core lifts, power lifts, making out the bulk
of their workouts, and then they might have one or two exercises Is Audrey and the sticking point.
So yeah, OK, so they're taking a step up.
So what I'll do in that situation is the first step for me is to look at, well, what 2 joint muscles
are we missing?
And so we've probably don't have any triceps, long head work.
We might not have any gastrocnemius work.
You know what else might be missing?
Maybe some hamstring work.
And I'm going to add those as I guess you could call them accessory exercises, whatever.
At the end of that routine, normally I'm still going to keep exercise order the the powerless first
up.
Honestly, that's probably the the first step I would take is just take a couple of sets away instead
of doing the five by two, exactly like three sets of triples even.
And then just give those sets to those accessory exercises or muscles.
Literally exactly the same place that I'm in.
I would absolutely just trim the trim the main sets back 3, three sets of these great replacement, 5
twos.
And yeah, just add on a couple of exercises that they're not doing and that's again going to be a
huge step towards a physique related to them that they, you know, would immediately notice.
Not immediately.
Immediately.
But more or less, yeah, within, yeah, if they haven't been doing yeah, OK, OK.
And that's going to lend us maybe what, a third of the way kind of.
Well, let's see what happens because I'm really interested to see how we, because what we've done
just here is by starting working from first principles, or at least fixed points, not first
principles, but by starting working from fixed points that already exist, we've created 2 quite
interesting style programs which are very, very different from what we started with.
This is what I thought would happen when I was planning out how we might have this conversation.
I was thinking to myself, we're going to end up with some very, very, very different routines that
all fit under the banner of of power building.
Because if we now come and say, well, OK, fine.
We started out with a power lifting routine.
We've converted it slightly into a slightly more bodybuilding friendly kind of routine.
And it looks basically like a powerlifting routine that's been slowed down a little bit in the sense
that you won't move quite so quickly in terms of strength gains, but you are round your physique a
little bit.
On the other end of the spectrum, we start with the body routine routine and we've done some pretty
hefty changes to it to make it a little bit more kind of focused on strength sports.
I'm not going to say much strength because that's not true, but strength sports.
So if we were to start from absolute scratch and say in the middle someone has both aspirations to
in the future, you know, kind of going both of those directions, not quite sure yet which direction
they want to go in.
How are we constructing a power building routine that moves them in both of those directions
simultaneously?
Yeah.
See, that's interesting because I think, I think someone, it's hard to be exactly in the middle.
I think you're going to have to pick a side a little bit.
And naturally, the side I'm going to pick is going to be the full body, which is going to be, I
think, leaning towards hypertrophy.
So the way I would structure that then would be interesting.
So I would do full body and I would potentially do a, a A.
But if that's too much for that individual, we could split it as an ABI, don't mind too much, but
I'll do full body.
And let's just say a, a, A and I'm gonna start with the the power lifts, but I'm probably gonna turn
like the deadlift into a more body composition style deadlift.
I'm gonna use a, a stiff like deadlift, for example, squat and bench.
I'm happy to keep them as is.
And then it's basically what I'm going to do is take the powerlifting program we talked about and
turn it into full body.
So then I'm just going to add those.
I'll probably do AB.
You know what I'll do AB, I'll keep the power lift on both.
And then the accessory work, I'm going to split across the AB.
So then I'll have say again, probably three sets of each of those power lifts, or two or three sets
of each of those power lifts.
And then I'll do one or two sets of those accessory muscles that are being missed and I'll split
them over the A and the B-day.
So it does.
But are you, are you falling into the trap of focusing over much on powerlifting as a strength sport
rather than possible other options of strength sports?
Because if you just do like squat, bench, deadlift, then are you neglecting the fact that strongman
generally doesn't test the bench?
It more often tests the overhead press.
Yeah.
So what you could do is if you follow the AB, you could have a bench from one day overhead.
On the other.
I'd probably still keep the squat in the hinge the same.
So OK, what kind of set reps games are you talking about?
Well, I'd probably still do honestly, like I don't mind it depending on if we're doing AB and we've
got like sort of the three main kind of lifts we're starting with.
I might even do that as like a three by five.
And then those later exercises that are more body comp focus, I'll do them as as single, like one or
two sets.
And I didn't care about the reps You know, that'll be 6 to 12.
You know what if it's convenient for that person.
Yeah, yeah.
You kind of ended up more or less where I was going to go, so.
There's a couple leading questions, but OK.
Well, I, no, I mean, I, I just wanted to make sure that you didn't fall into the same trap that
everybody falls into, which is assuming the.
Power.
The power.
Exists, yeah.
And to be honest, in that situation, when I do program the shoulder work, I would be inclined to
program that as an overhead and the back I'd be inclined to program as a pull up.
So I'd still keep I get more kind of traditionally kind of strength focused version of that muscle.
Yeah.
So basically I'm, I'm going to essentially call what I was doing when I was training way to pull ups
and dips as pretty much power building routine, more or less.
Because if I was doing a maximum strength routine, I would program it slightly differently now.
But I think basically, yeah, three sets of five or even three sets of three rising to five is, is
probably a really, really solid place for the strength exercises.
And I would probably have similar to you, I would have the I would have overhead press in there, I'd
have bench in there, I'd have squat and I'd have probably, honestly, I'd probably have two deadly
variations in there.
And obviously I'd have, I said wait to pull ups and dips yet.
You have So what were the 2?
So you would have a stiff leg, presumably.
So yeah, but I think I would probably want, I think I would probably want to have a, an actual from
the floor proper bed lift.
To keep your options open if someone does.
To decide to go open for someone because again, it's both strongman and and powerlifting compete on
that lift.
So it would feel silly not to have it in the program.
But I just love the stiff leg so much as a kind of an exercise in and of its own right.
But yeah, fundamentally I think I would be looking to populate the program, the full body AB with as
many of those lifts I think are going to be really solid transfers as I can.
And then like you say, when you look at that and you've got everything like listed out and you go,
what else can I now shoehorn in at the end, which is going to get me towards the bodybuilding side
of things.
So that starts to actually bring us back close to Reg.
It does, It does, just not as an AB.
Just not as an AB.
And he was kind of working with, yeah, five sets of five at some.
Point.
He worked up to five sets, Yeah.
Worked up to five sets, but yeah, I mean, we're talking about three sets of five and we're
programming those kind of exercises.
And then, yeah, just what all we've done really is switch it from 4 body A to four body AB.
And then that gives us a little bit of wriggle room on the back end of each workout to shoehorn in
knee extensions and leg curls and anything else that might give a little bit more hypertrophy.
And you can even take that format and you could tweak it to be slightly more power or power strength
side or slightly more bodybuilding side, depending on how you're doing that AB, right?
So you could keep the strength exercises on both of them and then you can alternate the hypertrophy
exercises, more specific exercises on the A and the B.
Or vice versa, you can alternate the strange style exercises on AB and then keep the hypertrophy
ones the same on both A&B.
Yeah.
I mean, I think ultimately the essence or the, the spirit of powerbuilding is that it, it's, and
maybe I'm reading more into this than a lot of people do, but for me, the spirit of powerbuilding is
it's not tied to a specific sport.
It's supposed to be a kind of more inclusive concept which fits or supports A wider variety of
future kind of goals, if you like.
So I, I think, you know, like we were starting out with, you know, a powerlifting routine that you
modify technically falls under the category of power building.
For me, it doesn't really feel like the spirit of power building is in that, in that program.
Similarly, when I look at a bodybuilding program that's kind of got a, to be honest, the way that
you constructed it was pretty, pretty close, but it still feels like it's not quite hitting the, the
true essence of what power building is.
But when you kind of just start from the beginning and you start building it up like we've just
done, and we end up pretty much in the same place as Reg.
And I realised that's kind of the spirit of power, which is it's, it's a, it's a wider variety of
strength exercises.
So I've, you know, I had, you know, weight dips and pull ups and you know, we've got overhead
presses and bench and different data variations and squat in there as well.
All of that kind of stuff, you know, and you're training all those things to increase strength in
those situations because it then supports a variety of different maximum strength related sports in
the future.
Yeah.
I think most people will, when they start designing a program like this, they have some lifts that
they're either emotionally attached to or they're dysfunctional, like an indicator lift, so they can
compare to something else.
And so those might take a slightly higher priority in, in this.
Like for me, I know when I program because a lot of my female clients like to train this way, you
know, that they like this sort of power building style and they, they, they suited very well because
often they don't have the same hypertrophy kind of goal in terms of maximizing every single muscle
and muscle region.
So they're happy to drop out a couple of things and they like to feel strong and handle heavy loads
and handle loads heavier than the guys in the gym.
And so they like to have a lift.
They can compare and be like, OK, I can see that, you know, a, if I wanted to do a powerlifting
meet, this is what people are benching.
OK, I can compare to that.
So often it's it's helpful for those people to have a kind of benchmark in there.
Yeah.
And as, as you say, it's going to be a different benchmark for everybody.
I mean, interestingly, I was kind of sort of thinking to myself, why didn't I say hip thrust when I
was selecting my exercises?
Because in the podcast of Rob, I basically say hip thrust pretty much every episode.
I could probably, I could probably get some kind of sponsorship for the number of times I say
because basically programming for every single athletic scenario that I can kind of come across.
But I guess maybe just wasn't really.
I was, I was trying to keep my exercise list relatively constrained.
But you know, I think it could end up in there to be.
Honest.
Yeah, I think so too, especially if you're starting thinking about it more from the power side,
although I believe from the body bully side as well.
Yeah, Yeah.
It just isn't because we tend to kind of quarter the body and either upper pushing, upper pulling,
lower push, lower pull.
It's just not one of those four exercises if you then extend out to another one or two exercises.
This is the thing because when I'm thinking about athletic train strength training programs, I
don't.
I literally start in the center.
And.
We're literally just kind of right approximate traditional sequence.
I start, start the absolute center of the body.
I'm like, OK, so I'm going to start with a hip thrust and I'm going to progress outwards.
And it's going to be, if I'm going upwards, it's going to be torso rotation and we're downwards.
It's just going to be squat or or hinge pattern, you know, and then you kind of work out from that.
Whereas as you rightly say, with with kind of this bodybuilding focus lens, if you like, you kind of
think about things in a different way.
But yeah, I think maybe actually a power building routine deserves deserves it.
So what I really enjoy doing when I program for power building is actually taking as close as
possible to the the power side of that kind of archetypal routine we talked about, and then the
building side and then doing them as an AB instead of trying to amalgamate both into a single
routine.
Yeah, I mean, that's, that's a really, that's a really interesting way of doing it, actually.
The challenge of course, is that the the space that you need in a training week to train all of
those strength exercises to a high level is is is not doesn't really lend itself to only having 1
1/2 sessions a week.
Because you want more exposures or because it's going to be hard, you want more tires?
I can't.
So if you're saying to me, you know, I want you to work on your weight, to pull up your weight, to
dip your overhead press your bench, your squat you.
I just can't do that.
It's.
Going to be a lot in a single workout.
I need I need a forward AB to do that.
Yeah, yeah, Yeah.
I'm trying to think what I would normally do there.
I mean, like you could probably like in that power style of routine, even if you're doing say three
sets per exercise for me, I would usually program about 6 exercises in that routine.
And so generally, that's going to cover most of those high priority strength focused exercises.
And then you could still adjust that bodybuilding routine to include what you're missing.
So for example, I would often put the dip on that bodybuilding routine.
You could put a hip thrust on that bodybuilding routine.
So you're still, I guess there's still compromises to an extent that are being made, But as much as
possible, I'm trying to stick to those two kind of unadulterated routines.
Would you have a preference over those two?
Like, would you?
It sounds like you're leaning towards an amalgamation of both in a single kind of routine style, as
opposed to doing both and alternating?
Yeah, I think I would be much.
I'd be much happier with the, the, the kind of the way that we, we sort of naturally landed on a
full body AB version of what Red came up with.
I, I think that feels right to me in, in, in terms of practically, you know, making it work for a
long period of time.
Yeah, I think, I think it would.
It would sit better with me, to be honest.
Yeah.
I wonder how much of that as well is you favour fewer exercises per routine per workout.
And I tend to earn the side of more rather than fewer.
And I think that's probably going to be a limitation there on what's going to work better for
someone.
Yeah, I think that's probably true.
But while I do agree that, you know, my preferences on the bodybuilding side are definitely
preferences and you can stuff more exercises into a bodybuilding workout, I think on the strength
side you're probably going to struggle to make that work.
I think that's where that's that's the real issue.
Because if you say like you want to actually make progress on lifts like squat, deadlift and a bench
and a way to pull up and a way to dip, when those numbers start to get high, that workout is going
to be really, really unpleasant.
And you're going to basically the back end of it's going to be garbage.
It's just not going to really make the progress you want to make.
Whereas if you split it out into two halves and do it across two days, then suddenly it starts to
make a lot more sense.
I think that routine will be like looking at Regis routine there with the fives.
I think if you're trying to do fives for all those exercise as we've just outlined.
Even if you're doing 3 rising to five you.
Know yeah see when I if I was going to do that myself I would I'm doing something similar myself at
the moment and I'm I'm doing double s like I'm not doing if I agree if I was to do threes or fours
for a squat and an overhead and.
A stiff leg and and whatever else that's going to.
Kill.
So, OK.
Yeah.
So you're kind of, you know, introducing some reps in reserve there and you're giving yourself a bit
more space in the program and it starts to become as sort of.
Yeah, OK.
I can see how you might construct that then.
On the bodybuilding side I meant to mention no.
The powerlifting side, I meant to mention this and I forgot, we talked about taking those five by
two and turning them into say triples, like three sets or three or whatever.
Another method I quite like is and, and Bob Hoffman used to do this and again, you wouldn't want to
do this with too many exercises, too many sets, but he would do A54321.
And I, I quite like that in, in getting, keeping some of that strength work, but then adding in a
little bit more stimulus, a little bit more volume.
One of those sets, you know, for me when I programmed that I often drop off those singles unless
someone needs to be coordinated doing a single.
So often I'll do like a 454324 sets, getting a good amount of stimulating volume, working to heavy
up Rep ranges as well.
I think that can be a nice reps game as well.
Yeah, it's honestly not something I've ever played around with.
I am very impatient with changing loads.
When I'm working I like.
To kind of find the load that I want to work with.
And I work with it so.
That's brilliant.
That's been my experience.
So, OK, so anything else we've landed?
At very similar place to where we started inside the episode, which I think is quite interesting.
Yeah.
I mean, I, I think to be honest, there's, there's.
Power building is such a non specific term.
Everyone's going to have their own kind of ideas.
What I wanted to do really just today was give people a a spectrum, a continuum to think about it on
so that they can see that there's a number of ways of going about this.
And everyone is going to have their own priorities and one person's power building routine will
necessarily look different from someone else's.
I mean, even the one that we landed on, I was trying to keep it as broad as possible and I was kind
of constantly pushing you to keep it as broad as possible to support.
But somebody else may not need to do that if they're thinking it's going to be, oh, it's either
going to be powerlifting or it's going to be bodybuilding.
OK, well, now you don't have to do the weighted pull ups and dips and overhead pressing and all that
kind of stuff.
And you know, you can very much kind of go down the route of saying, well, it's just these
powerlifts and then the rest of it is going to be bodybuilding on the back end.
And then it does change things.
And then you probably could quite easily do a kind of full body a routine and alternate it.
Sorry, not full body a routine, full body a powerlifting and then full body a bodybuilding and
combine them and just alternate workouts.
So.
Yeah, I mean everybody's.
Going to have different kind of ideas and concepts and and goals that change the nature of what
power building is for them.
But I think to try and find the broadest possible, you know, most of the the power building routine
that would be applicable to the most people.
Most of the time.
I think what we've ended up with, which is basically just Reg's routine modified very slightly with
a little bit more or some different exercise selection would probably be probably pretty much
perfect.
Yeah.
And because it's interesting as well when you look at that sort of more strange side of things.
You know, people often and you know, we've we've talked about this and nauseam, but people often
think, well, you can't get the same kind of hypertrophy work doing fives or falls or threes or
whatever.
And I always find it interesting because often I look at a powerlifting routine and not all the
time, but sometimes a powerless routine to me makes more sense from a bodybuilding perspective than
most of the bodybuilding routines I see.
Well, of course.
I mean, that's.
Yeah.
I mean.
There's so much nonsense out there in the bodybuilding community.
But yeah, I mean, ultimately it's exercise selection really that's different.
You know, I mean, we've mentioned that we would go a little bit heavier on the Rep schemes, not, you
know, necessarily a lot heavier, but yeah, a little bit heavier.
And we'd probably use a few reps in reserve and more often on the strength stuff.
But, you know, fundamentally, it really just comes down to how many excises can you shoot one into a
session?
And with the bodybuilding side of it, we're shoehawning loads of exercises in.
And as a result, we're having to drop stuff out like, you know, barbell squats and bench presses,
you know, kind of things that you would probably want to do if you were prepare preparing yourself
for a strength sports kind of future.
And you put those back in and suddenly you're losing the capacity to do quite so many of those
exercises or at least as frequently.
And that's that's, that's the whole conversation in a nutshell.
So.
They have a power building.
I think power building is a really fun way to train.
I think a lot of people enjoy it.
I enjoy it.
It's I think it's probably one of the funnest.
If someone doesn't have a competitive goal on either end of that spectrum, I think it's one of the
funnest.
I can see you smoking.
Is that even a word?
That's why you're laughing at me.
OK, I.
Don't know, I'll have to Google it when I'm done.
Anyway, who knows, maybe our next phase in our hypertrophy past and present training group will be a
power building phase.
And if you guys are interested in that, let us know.
Like you guys who joined the group, we've got a group to chat there.
You know, if you guys want to see a particular routine inspired by a particular silver era lifter or
you want to, you know, move more towards power building or whatever, then we'll adapt the group to
what you guys are wanting as well.
Anyway, thank you guys for joining us for another episode and we'll be back next week.